Sources, Homage, Purpose, and
Openers of the Chariot-Ways
Jam-yang-shay-pa’s
Decisive Analysis of Maitreya’s
“Ornament for the Clear Realizations”:
Introduction 1
Gareth Sparham
Explained by Lo-sang-gyal-tshan
Edited by Jeffrey Hopkins
UMA INSTITUTE
FOR TIBETAN STUDIES

Decisive Analysis of the Perfection of Wisdom:
Introduction 1
Website for UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies (Union of the
Modern and the Ancient: gsar rnying zung `jug khang): uma-
tibet.org. UMA stands for “Union of the Modern and the Ancient”
and means “Middle Way” in Tibetan. UMA is a non-profit 501(c)3
organization.

Sources, Homage, Purpose, and
Openers of the Chariot-Ways
Jam-yang-shay-pa’s
Decisive Analysis of (Maitreya’s)
“Ornament for the Clear Realizations”:
Precious Lamp Illuminating All the Topics of the
Perfection of Wisdom: Introduction 1
Gareth Sparham
Explained by Lo-sang-gyal-tshan
Edited by Jeffrey Hopkins
UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies
uma-tibet.org

Education in Compassion and Wisdom
UMA Great Books Translation Project
Supported by generous grants from the
ING Foundation and Yeshe Khorlo Foundation
and gifts from individual sponsors—
Hsu Shu-Hsun and Chou Mei-Dai;
Chien Jin-Hong and Pu Chih-Pin;
Daniel E. Perdue
Translating texts from the heritage of Tibetan and Inner Asian Bud-
dhist systems. The project focuses on Great Indian Books and Ti-
betan commentaries from the Go-mang College syllabus as well as
a related theme on the fundamental innate mind of clear light in
Tantric traditions. A feature of the Project is the usage of consistent
vocabulary and format throughout the translations.
Publications are available online without cost under a Creative
Commons License with the understanding that downloaded mate-
for Union of the Modern and the Ancient (gsar rnying zung ’jug
khang). The UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies is a non-profit
501(c)3 organization.
UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies
7330 Harris Mountain Lane
Dyke, VA 22935-1008, USA
Version: April, 2015
Sparham, Gareth.
Sources, homage, purpose, and openers of the chariot-ways: jam-yang-shay-pa’s
decisive analysis of (maitreya’s) “ornament for the clear realizations”: precious lamp illu-
minating all the topics of the perfection of wisdom: introduction 1 / by Gareth Sparham.
Includes bibliographical references.
1. 'Jam dbyangs bzhad pa ngag dbang brtson grus, 1648-1722. Bstan gcos mngon par
rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi mtha' dpyod shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i don kun gsal ba'i rin
chen sgron me. 2. Byams pa (Maitreya). Mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan. 3. Seng ge bzang po
(Haribhadra) 'Grel pa don gsal. 4. Dge-lugs-pa (Sect)--Doctrines. 5. Wisdom—Religious
aspects--Buddhism.
I. Lo-sang-gyal-tshan, 1966- II. Title.

Contents
Jam-yang-shay-pa’s
Decisive Analysis of (Maitreya’s)
2. Explanation establishing it is reasonable to compose the
Preface
Jam-yang-shay-pa (1648-1722) wrote the Decisive Analysis of (Mait-
reya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”: Precious Lamp Illuminat-
ing All the Topics of the Perfection of Wisdom between 1712 and 1718.a It
is a very long composition in eight parts filling two volumes of his Col-
lected Works (vols. ja and nya) and is one of the last textbooks he wrote.b
It is a testament to Jam-yang-shay-pa’s phenomenal intellect and breadth
of learning.
The Decisive Analysis is written in the Sang-phuc Perfection of Wis-
dom d commentarial tradition that goes back to the famous translator e
Ngog Lo-dan-shay-rab (1057-1109),f the nephew of the founder of Sang-
phu monastery and a student of the Indian scholar adept Dīpaṃkāra Atisha
(982-1054). Ngog Lo-dan-shay-rab, like Atisha, privileged Maitreya’s Or-
nament for the Clear Realizationsg for gaining a correct understanding of
the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras. Amongst the many explanations of Mait-
reya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations extant in India, Ngog Lo-dan-
shay-rab privileged Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary,h revising
the Tibetan translation of his work and writing a Summaryi of it.
Jam-yang-shay-pa Ngag-wang-tsön-drü’s ('jam dbyangs bzhad pa ngag dbang brtson
grus, 1648-1722) Decisive Analysis / Decisive Analysis of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the
Clear Realizations”: Precious Lamp Illuminating All the Topics of the Perfection of Wis-
dom (phar phyin mtha' dpyod / bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi mtha’ dpyod
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i don kun gsal ba’i rin chen sgron me). This is Derek
Maher’s dating of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s works in “Appendix I, Table of Contents of Ja-
myang Shaypa’s Collected Works,” in Derek Frank Maher, “Knowledge and Authority in
Tibetan Middle Way Schools of Buddhism: A Study of the Gelukba (dge lugs pa) Episte-
mology of Jamyang Shayba ('jam dbyangs bshad pa) In Its Historical Context,” (Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Virginia, 2003), 307-322.
Maher, “Knowledge and Authority,” 164, “Throughout his later life...Jamyang Shayba’s
literary production diminished also.”
gsang phu.
prajñāpāramitā.
lo chen.
rngog blo ldan shes rab.
g
abhisamayālaṃkāra.
h
abhisamayālaṃkāranāmaprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstravivṛti.
i
Ngog Lo-dan-shay-rab’s Topical Summary of the “Treatise of Instruction on the Perfec-
tion of Wisdom, Ornament for the Clear Realizations” / Topical Summary (shes rab kyi
pha rol tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi Tīk chung
zhes bya ba /bsdus don), (Institute of Tibetan Classics edition); translated by Gareth Spar-
ham, The Perfection of Wisdom Tradition: Three Classic Selections (Wisdom Publications,

Preface 8
Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations stanzas 1.3-4 says:a
The perfection of wisdom will be thoroughly
Explained by way of eight categories.
Exalted-knower-of-all-aspects, knower of paths,
Then knower of all,
Completely realizing all aspects,
Passed to the peak, serial,
Momentary thoroughly complete enlightenment,
And body of attributes are the eight.
Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary breaks down the eight clear re-
alizationsb taught in these two stanzas into seventy main topics. As ex-
plained in more detail below, the embedded table of contents of Jam-yang-
shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis is loosely based on these seventy topics.
Jeffrey Hopkins and Jongbok Yi’s The Hidden Teaching of the Perfec-
tion of Wisdom Sūtras, a translation of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Eloquent
Presentation of the Eight Categories and Seventy Topics: Sacred Word of
Guru Ajitac published earlier in this series, identifies each of the eight cat-
egories and the seventy topics, giving for each a brief definition, subdivi-
sions, and, where appropriate, its location within the path and ground
structure of Great Vehicle Buddhism. We direct readers to that work, pub-
lished online in this same series, particularly to the table of contents where
the names of each category and topic are conveniently given.
Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations and Haribhadra’s
Clear Meaning Commentary are the root texts of the Decisive Analysis.
They give Jam-yang-shay-pa’s book its basic structure. Besides them,
Jam-yang-shay-pa accords two Tibetan Perfection of Wisdom commen-
taries an equally authoritative status. These are Tsong-kha-pa Lo-sang-
drag-pa’s (1356-1419) d long Perfection of Wisdom commentary called
forthcoming).
This is Jeffrey Hopkins and Jongbok Yi’s rendering of the stanzas, available online at
the last line.
abhisamaya, mngon rtogs.
This is dngos po brgyad don bdun cu’i rnam bzhag legs par bshad pa mi pham bla ma'i
zhal lung, vol. 15, 111-173, in Maher’s Appendix 1, 321. Maher gives no date for the text,
nor do Hopkins and Yi.
tsong kha pa blo bzang grags pa.

Preface 9
Golden Garlanda (finished in 1398), and the Ornament of the Essenceb by
Tsong-kha-pa’s close associate and disciple Gyal-tshab Darma-rin-chenc
(1364-1432) written ca. 1420.
The structure of Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations and
Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary is concentric. After making
homage to the Perfection of Wisdom (and in Haribhadra’s case the lumi-
naries in the tradition), and setting down a statement of purpose, both
works set forth the eight categories, then give the subdivisions of each of
the categories, and finally explain each of the topics in slightly more detail.
The structure of the two Tibetan Perfection of Wisdom commentaries,
Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland and Gyal-tshab’s Ornament of the Es-
sence, is similar, though both are much much longer and more detailed
works.
Taken in its entirety Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis also has a
concentric structure, based as it is on these four root texts. In the first part
of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis, however, the section translated
here covering only his analysis of the homage and statement of purpose
sections, the larger structure of the text is not obvious.
With that in mind the opening section of the current book is structured
as a series of chapters based on the traditional divisions used down to the
present day by debating teachers in Go-mangd monastery:e
1. Openers of the Chariot-ways
2. Presentation of Beings of the Three Capacities
3. On the Person of Maitreya and his Works
4. Explanation of Maitreya’s Stanza of Homage
5. Presentation of the Not-one-and-many Reason
6. Dispelling Objections to Three Knowledges
7. Presentation of Nirvāṇa
8. Presentation of the Wheels of Doctrine
Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom as well as (Haribhadra’s) Com-
mentary: Golden Garland of Eloquence (shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi
bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan ’grel pa dang bcas pa’i rgya cher bshad pa legs
bshad gser gyi phreng ba).
Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations” and (Haribhadra’s)
Commentary: Ornament for the Essence (shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi
bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi rtsa ba 'grel pa dang bcas pa'i rnam bshad
snying po'i rgyan).
rgyal tshab darma rin chen.
sgo mang.
These chapters have been supplied by Lo-sang-gyal-tshan.

Preface 10
This structure is implicit in the text, but the chapters and chapter titles are
not actually present in the Tibetan version.
Jam-yang-shay-pa prefaces these “chapters” (following the model of
the four root texts) with an introductory section of ornate stanzas of hom-
age to the luminaries of the Perfection of Wisdom tradition in India and
Tibet, starting with the Buddha and ending with Ngag-wang-lo-sang-gya-
tsho the Great Fifth Dalai Lamaa and his tutor Paṇ-chen Lo-sang-chö-kyi-
gyal-tshan.b
He follows this, in an introductory section of the first chapter, “Open-
ers of the Chariot-ways,” with a survey of the Perfection of Wisdom liter-
ature. The metaphor employed in “Openers of the Chariot-ways” is of a
jungle that is hard to penetrate, and of a strong cart that blazes a clear trail
through the jungle so that others can easily follow. The jungle is the Per-
fection of Wisdom literature, and the carts or chariots are the exegetes––
Nāgārjuna and Maitreya in one way or Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga in another
way, according to Jam-yang-shay-pa––who have made the meanings and
topic of the Perfection of Wisdom literature clear for later readers.
In the Sang-phu tradition the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras are divided
into seventeen mother and child sūtras.c Mother sūtras are those that ex-
plicitly teach the eight clear realizations (listed in Maitreya’s Ornament
for the Clear Realizations 1.3), and Child sūtras are those that do not do
so. Jam-yang-shay-pa references Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland which
in turn bases its list on the Fruit Clusters of Scriptures, a Perfection of
Wisdom commentary in the Sang-phu tradition by Bu-tön Rin-chen-drub
(1290-1364).d The list is not exhaustive, but identifies the most important
long Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras and many of the shorter versions.
The six Mother sūtras are:
1. One Hundred Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra / Hundred Thou-
sand (śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
stong phrag brgya pa / 'bum)
2. Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra / Twenty-five Thou-
sand (pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu
phyin pa stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa / nyi khri)
3. Eighteen Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra / Eighteen Thousand
(aṣṭādaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
ngag dbang blo bzang rgya mtsho, 1642–1682.
paṇ chen blo bzang chos kyi rgyal mtshan, 1570–1662.
yum dang sras.
bu ston rin chen grub, the famous editor of the Translation of (Buddha’s) Word (bka’
’gyur) and Translation of the Treatises (bstan ’gyur) and prolific author.

Preface 11
khri brgyad stong pa / khri brgyad stong pa)
4. Ten Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra / Ten Thousand
(daśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa khri
pa)
5. Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra / Eight Thousand
(aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa
brgyad stong pa / brgyad stong pa)
6. Stanza Summary of the Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra /
Condensed Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra (prajñāpāramitāsañcaya-
gāthā / bhagavadprajñāpāramitāratnaguṇasaṃcayagāthā /
ratnaguṇasaṃcayagāthā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa sdud pa
tshigs su bcad pa/ sdud pa)
Amongst these, Jam-yang-shay-pa primarily cites “the Extensive, Middle,
and Condensed Mother Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras,”a that is, the Hun-
dred Thousand, Twenty-five Thousand, and Eight Thousand versions, and
amongst these primarily the Twenty-five Thousand and Eight Thousand.
Readers should be aware that the word “mother” (Tibetan yum) in the Per-
fection of Wisdom literature is just an abbreviation; although in some con-
texts it has a specific meaning, in general it is used to avoid having to
continually use the longer term “perfection of wisdom.”
The eleven Child sūtras are:
1. Seven Hundred Perfection of Wisdom / (saptaśatikāprajñāpāramitā,
shes rab kyi pha rol phyin pa bdun brgya pa)
2. Five Hundred Perfection of Wisdom / (pañcaśatikāprajñāpāramitā,
shes rab kyi pha rol phyin pa lnga brgya pa)
3. Three Hundred Perfection of Wisdom / Vajra Cutter / Diamond Sūtra
(prajñāpāramitā vajracchedikā, sher rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa rdo
rje bcod pa/ sum rgya pa)
4. One Hundred and Fifty Perfection of Wisdom Principles
(prajñāpāramitānayaśatapañcaśatikā, shes rab kyi pha rol phyin pa'i
tshul brgya lnga bcu pa)
5. Fifty Perfection of Wisdom (prajñāpāramitāpañcaśatikā, ‘phags pa
bcom ldan 'das ma shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa lnga bcu pa)
6. Twenty-five Doors to the Perfection of Wisdom,
pañcaviṃśatikāprajñāpāramitāmukha, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin
pa'i sgo nyi shu rtsa lnga pa)
7. Questions of Suvikrāntavikrāmin: An Exposition of the Perfection of
Wisdom (suvikāntavikrāmiparipṛcchāprajñāpāramitānirdeśa, 'phags
yum rgyas 'bring bsdus gsum.

Preface 12
pa rab rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pas zhus pa/ shes rab kyi pha rol phyin
pa bstan pa/ rab rtsal gnon gyis zhus pa)
8. Heart Sūtra / Heart of Wisdom Sūtra, (bhagavatī
prajñāpāramitāhṛdaya, bcom ldan 'das ma sher rab kyi pha rol tu
phyin pa'i snying po)
9. Perfection of Wisdom for Kauśika (kauśikaprajñāpāramitā, sher phyin
kau shi ka)
10. Perfection of Wisdom in One Syllable (ekākṣarīmātāprajñāpāramitā,
de bzhin gshegs pa thams cad kyi yum shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin
ma yi ge gcig ma zhes bya ba)
11. Perfection of Wisdom in a Few Syllables (svalpākṣaraprajñāpāramitā,
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa yi ge nyung ngu)
Maitreya and Haribhadra make it clear at the beginning of their re-
spective works that they are explaining the words of the Perfection of Wis-
dom Sūtras. Having done so, they largely leave it up to their reader to relate
what they say to a specific section. Similarly, Jam-yang-shay-pa, as ex-
plained below, gives an initial context for each topic or section in his De-
cisive Analysis, but otherwise rarely relates explicitly what he is saying to
a specific passage in a sūtra. The distance of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s text from
the actual words of the Sūtras should not, however, be mistaken as a sign
of their less than central importance in his Decisive Analysis.
In the final part of his introductory section Jam-yang-shay-pa sets
forth the main Indian commentaries connected with Maitreya’s Ornament
for the Clear Realizations and Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary.
Jam-yang-shay-pa again references Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland as
the source of his list. I borrow here from Jeffrey Hopkins and Jongbok Yi’s
The Hidden Teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras a most helpful
chart giving these commentaries.
Twenty-one commentaries on Maitreya’s Ornament for the
Clear Realizations
I. Correlating the Ornament with specific Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras
A. Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra
1. Āryavimuktisena (’phags pa grol sde, ca. 6th century C.E.). Com-
mentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on
the ‘Superior Twenty-Five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtra’: Ornament for the Clear Realizations.” This is the first extant
commentary based on the Ornament, commonly abbreviated in Ti-
bet as nyi snang (Illumination of the “Twenty-Five”)
2. Bhadanta Vimuktisena (btsun pa grol sde). [Sub]commentary (to

Preface 13
Āryavimuktisena’s “Commentary”] on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of
Quintessential Instructions on the ‘Superior Twenty-Five Thousand
Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra’: Ornament for the Clear Reali-
zations”
3. Haribhadra (seng ge bzang po, ca. 8th century C.E.). Twenty-five
Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra / The Eight Chaptered
4. Ratnākarashānti (rin chen 'byung gnas zhi ba). Pure Commentary
on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”/ Purity
B. One Hundred Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra
5. Dharmashrī. Explanation of the “One Hundred Thousand
Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”
C. Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra
6. Haribhadra. Explanation of the “Eight Thousand Perfection of
Wisdom Sūtra”: Illumination of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the
Clear Realizations,” commonly abbreviated in Tibet as rgyan snang
(Illumination of the “Ornament”)
7. Ratnākarashānti. Commentary on the Difficult Points of the
“Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”: Quintes-
sence
8. Abhayākaragupta ('jigs med 'byung gnas sbas pa). Commentary
on the “Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”: Moonlight of
Essential Points
D. Stanza Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom
9. Haribhadra. Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Stanza
Summary of the Precious Qualities of the Supramundane Victorious
[Mother]”
10. Buddhashrījñāna. Commentary on the Difficult Points of the
“Stanza Summary”
11. Dharmashrī. Key to the Treasury of the Perfection of Wisdom
E. One Hundred Thousand, Twenty-five Thousand, and Eight Thousand
Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras
12. Smṛtijñānakīrti. Indicating Through Eight Concordant Mean-
ingsa the Mother Perfection of Wisdom Taught Extensively in One
Hundred Thousand, Taught in Medium Length in Twenty-five Thou-
sand, and Taught in Brief in Eight Thousand [Stanzas]
II. Not correlating the Ornament with specific Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtras
The eight are the eight clear realizations, that is, the eight categories.

Preface 14
13. Haribhadra. Clear Meaning Commentary / Commentary on
(Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfec-
tion of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Realizations”
A. Two commentaries on Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary
14. Dharmamitra (chos kyi bshes gnyen). Explanation of
(Haribhadra’s) “Commentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Ornament for the
Clear Realizations’”: Very Clear Words
15. Dharmakīrtishrī (chos kyi grags pa dpal, or gser gling pa). Ex-
planation of (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Trea-
tise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom: Or-
nament for the Clear Realizations’”: Illumination of the Difficult to
Realize
B. Three summaries
A summary of Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary
16. Prajñākaramati (shes rab 'byung gnas blo gros, 950-1030).
Summary of (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Or-
nament for the Clear Realizations’”
Two summaries of Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations
17. Atisha (dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna, mar me mdzad ye shes, 982-
1054). Lamp Summary of (Maitreya’s) “Perfection of Wisdom”
18. Kumārashrībhadra (bkra shis rgyal mtshan). Summary of
(Maitreya’s) “Perfection of Wisdom”
C. Two other commentaries on Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commen-
tary
19. Ratnakīrti. Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the
Clear Realizations”: A Portion of Glory
20. Buddhashrījñāna. Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of
Quintessential Instructions on the Supramundane Victorious Mother
Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Realizations”: Wis-
dom Lamp Garland
D. One treatise
21. Abhayākaragupta (died 1140). a Ornament to the Subduer’s
Thought, a general explanation of Buddha’s word, the final three
chapters of which mainly teach the topics of Maitreya’s Ornament.
Among these, readers should be aware that Jam-yang-shay-pa cites the
This is the date of his death according to H. Nakamura, Indian Buddhism, a survey with
bibliographical notes, Osaka: Kufs Publications, 1980.

Preface 15
Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra, like most Tibetan writ-
ers,a in Haribhadra’s version contained in the Translation of the Treatises
(bstan ’gyur) listed here as the Twenty-five Thousand Stanza Perfection of
Wisdom Sūtra or Eight Chaptered. This version is called the Eight Chap-
teredb because it inserts the names of the eight categories from Maitreya’s
Ornament for the Clear Realizations into the Sūtra.
Amongst the commentaries, Jam-yang-shay-pa relies mainly on the
commentaries by Āryavimuktisena and Haribhadra and, within Tibet, prin-
cipally follows Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland and Gyal-tshab’s Orna-
ment for the Essence. To the extent that Jam-yang-shay-pa treats Tsong-
kha-pa and Gyal-tshab, along with the third member of the Ge-lug trium-
virate Khay-drub-ge-leg-pal-sangc (1385-1438), as authoritative it can be
said his Decisive Analysis is written from a Ge-lug-pad perspective.
Here a slight digression is necessary to explain why Jam-yang-shay-
pa takes both Tsong-kha-pa and Gyal-tshab’s Perfection of Wisdom com-
mentaries as roots texts, rather than just Tsong-kha-pa’s commentary
alone. Tsong-kha-pa wrote his Golden Garland some eight years before he
began publishing a series of works in which he sets forth his mature views.
Summarizing the mature period during which Tsong-kha-pa completed his
most influential books Jeffrey Hopkins says:e
In 1402, at the age of forty-five, he wrote the Great Exposition of
the Stages of the Pathf…Five years later, when he was fifty, he
began writing a commentary on Nāgārjuna’s Treatise on the Mid-
dle called Ocean of Reasoningg…He began writing the Treatise
The exception is Dol-po-pa She-rab-gyal-tshan (dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan, 1292-
1361) who unequivocally rejects Haribhadra’s version.
le'u brgyad ma.
mkhas grub dge legs dpal bzang.
dge lugs pa.
Jeffrey Hopkins, Emptiness in the Mind-Only School of Buddhism (Berkeley and Los
Angeles, California: University of California Press, 1999), 12-13.
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment Thoroughly Teaching All the Stages of Practice of
the Three Types of Beings (skyes bu gsum gyi nyams su blang ba’i rim pa thams cad tshang
bar ston pa’i byang chub lam gyi rim pa).
g
Explanation of (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”: Ocean of Reasoning / Great
Commentary on (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle” (dbu ma rtsa ba’i tshig le’ur byas
pa shes rab ces bya ba’i rnam bshad rigs pa’i rgya mtsho).

Preface 16
Differentiating Interpretable and Definitive Meanings: The Es-
sence of Eloquence...After completing The Essence in 1408,a he
returned to commenting on Nāgārjuna’s text...In 1415, he went on
to write the Medium Exposition of the Stages of the Path,b and fi-
nally, at age sixty-one, one year before his death, he wrote a com-
mentary on Chandrakīrti’s Supplement to (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise
on the Middle.” c
In his mature works Tsong-kha-pa says that three of the five treatises of
Maitreya (Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras, Differentiation of the
Middle and the Extremes, and Differentiation of Phenomena and Noume-
non)d are from a provisional Mind-Onlye perspective. He says the Treatise
on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehiclef is written from a definitive
Middle Way Consequenceg school perspective, and the fifth of the five
treatises of Maitreya, the Ornament for the Clear Realizations, is written
in part at least from the Middle Way Autonomyh school perspective.i
Jam-yang-shay-pa is aware of issues raised by early opponents of
Tsong-kha-pa, in particular by Rong-tön Shay-ja-kun-rig j (1367-1449),
whom he names explicitly, and whose “mistaken” views he cites on a
Hopkins takes the date from Leonard W. J. van der Kuijp, “Apropos of a Recent Contri-
bution to the History of Central Way Philosophy in Tibet: Tsong Khapa’s Speech of Gold ”
in Berliner Indologische Studien 1 (Reinbek, Germany: Verlag für Orientalistische Fach-
publikationen, 1985), 68, n. 2.
Medium-Length Exposition of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment to be Practiced by
Beings of the Three Capacities (skyes bu gsum gyis nyams su blang ba’i byang chub lam
gyi rim pa).
Extensive Explanation of (Chandrakīrti’s) “Supplement to (Nāgārjuna’s) ‘Treatise on
the Middle’”: Illumination of the Thought (dbu ma la ’jug pa’i rgya cher bshad pa dgongs
pa rab gsal).
The three are Maitreya’s Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras
(mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, theg pa chen po’i mdo sde rgyan gyi tshig le’ur byas pa); Differ-
entiation of the Middle and the Extremes (madhyāntavibhāgakārikā, dbu dang mtha' rnam
par 'byed pa tshigs su byas pa); and Differentiation of Phenomena and Noumenon (dhar-
madharmatāvibhaṅga, chos dang chos nyid rnam par ’byed pa).
cittamātra.
mahāyānottaratantraśāstra, theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma’i bstan bcos.
g
prāsaṅgika.
h
svātantrika.
i
This is spelled out by Gyal-tshab in his Ornament for the Essence and Commentary on
(Maitreya’s) “Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle.” Gyal-tshab describes
himself as recording the view of his teacher Tsong-kha-pa.
j
rong ston shes bya run rig.

Preface 17
number of occasions. Rong-tön’s objections, already voiced by his teacher
Yag-tön Sang-gyay-pala (1350- 1414), are reiterated and refined over a pe-
riod of 300 years, in particular by the Sa-kyab scholar Go-ram-pac (1429-
1489), the Sa-kya Jo-nang scholar Shākya Chog-dand (1428-1507), and
the eighth Karma-pa Mi-kyö Dor-jee (1507-1554). Gyal-tshab and Khay-
drub head a long line of Ge-lug writers who responded vigorously to these
criticisms of Tsong-kha-pa’s views over this same period.
Rong-tön contrasts the views implicit in Tsong-kha-pa Golden Gar-
land with the mature views Tsong-kha-pa sets forth in his later works. He
observes that in his Golden Garland Tsong-kha-pa both praises Maitreya
as a great opener of a chariot-way of explication on a par with Nāgārjuna,
and yet says some of Maitreya’s works are written from a mistaken point
of view. Rong-tön also points out Tsong-kha-pa gives great importance to
Haribhadra while at the same time relegating Haribhadra’s views to a
lower Middle Way school that in the final analysis is wrong. Behind these
somewhat superficial criticisms lies a deeper engagement with Tsong-kha-
pa’s explanation of the two truths. Whereas Tsong-kha-pa unites valid cog-
nition with a strong refutation of existence (criticized as nihilism) in his
presentation of ultimate truth; and unites a rejection of totally valid cogni-
tion with commonly-accepted existence (criticized as realism) in his
presentation of conventional truth, Rong-tön denies valid cognition plays
a role in an ultimate beyond all conceptualization, and presents the Mind-
Only works of Maitreya as giving the correct explanation of conventional
truth. In particular, Rong-tön gives to Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later
Scriptures of the Great Vehicle a central role in explaining an ultimate that
is non-dual with the clear lightf of mind.
Gyal-tshab’s Ornament of the Essence, written ca. 1420, must be seen
in the context of these criticisms of Tsong-kha-pa. It is a reworking of
Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland to avoid contradictions with Tsong-kha-
pa’s mature views. Jam-yang-shay-pa, writing in the early 18th century,
cites both Tsong-kha-pa’s and Gyal-tshab’s Perfection of Wisdom works
as authoritative in order to avail himself of the stronger, more defensible
presentation of Tsong-kha-pa’s views.
g.yag ston sangs rgyas dpal.
sa skya.
go bo rab 'byams pa bsod nams seng ge.
gser mdog paṇ chen shākya mchog ldan.
mi bskyod rdo rje.
'od gsal.

Preface 18
OVERVIEW OF THE BOOK
The structure of the Openers of the Chariot-ways chapter follows a
pattern shared with Decisive Analysis literature that can be seen as a mark
of this particular genre. First there are three headings:
1. the passage the section takes as point of departure and expands on,a
2. a syllogism,b and
3. decisive analysis.c
Here in this text, under the first heading Jam-yang-shay-pa gives a context
to his analysis by citing the relevant passage from Maitreya’s Ornament
for the Clear Realizations and/or Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commen-
tary and by relating it to a section of a Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra. He
usually just cites the first and last words of the passage, or even just the
first word expecting his readers to be familiar with the texts. In the English
translation the cited passages are given in their entirety inserted into the
body of the text.
The second heading is essentially a stylistic device that allows a writer
to summarize the accepted content of a contextualizing passage within pre-
senting it as a formal syllogism. It makes the third heading “decisive anal-
ysis” syntactically possible.
This third heading is the major one. Most of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s book
is presented under this third heading, and indeed, it gives the Decisive
Analysis genre its name and Jam-yang-shay-pa’s own specific work, De-
cisive Analysis, its title.
This third section, also called decisive analysis, is divided into three
parts:
1. refuting mistakes,d
2. positing our own system, and
3. dispelling objections.
Usually Jam-yang-shay-pa explicitly spells out the three parts, but in some
of the chapters they are implicit. In such cases the missing headings have
been inserted into the body of the text in parenthesis.
spros.
sbyor ba.
mtha' dpyod.
The abbreviation is dgag bzhag spang, that is, 'khrul ba dgag pa or gzhan lugs dgag pa,
rang lugs bzhag pa, and rtsod pa spong ba.

Preface 19
The arguments set forth and refuted in the first part (“refuting mis-
takes”) are to be understood in the light of the second part (“positing our
own system”). Sometimes the second part is very brief, simply giving the
tenable point of view as Jam-yang-shay-pa accepts it. Since the mistaken
arguments Jam-yang-shay-pa refutes in the first part may be wrong in only
a very small particular, a reader may sometimes find it helpful to look at
Jam-yang-shay-pa’s own system in advance. In many cases, however, it is
only possible to fully understand the logic of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s own sys-
tem by seeing it in the light of the many mistakes it seeks to avoid. In such
cases a reader would do better to work through the mistakes teased out in
the sometimes complicated exchanges set forth in the first part, and only
then try to understand Jam-yang-shay-pa’s own view.
The third part “dispelling objections” meets objections raised to Jam-
yang-shay-pa’s system. On some occasions there is a subtext to the point
being raised.
The main complexity in the text is to identify the views that are ac-
cepted and the views that are rejected. To aid readers, the accepted views
have been highlighted in blue, and the rejected views highlighted in red. It
is relatively easy to sort out who accepts what when the opponent is a lu-
minary of another Tibetan sect opposing Tsong-kha-pa (like Rong-tön, for
example), but it is particularly difficult to sort out who accepts what when
the views being rejected are by earlier Ge-lug-pa writers whose works
have been adopted by other Ge-lug-pa monasteries as authoritative. The
intra-Ge-lug controversies, as Jeffrey Hopkins has shown in his monumen-
tal work on Tsong-kha-pa’s Treatise Differentiating the Interpretable and
the Definitive: The Essence of Eloquence,a are often sharper than inter-sect
controversies.
Prologue and Mind-Only section has been translated by Jeffrey Hopkins, Emptiness in
the Mind-Only School of Buddhism, Dynamic Responses to Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence
of Eloquence, Volume 1 (Berkeley and Los Angeles, California: University of California
Press, 1999) as has the introductory section on the Middle Way School in Emptiness in the
Middle Way School of Buddhism: Mutual Reinforcement of Understanding Dependent-
Arising and Emptiness, Dynamic Responses to Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence,
Volume 4 (UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies, uma-tibet.org, 2015). The remaining sec-
tions are in a draft translation by Jeffrey Hopkins in his Emptiness in the Consequence
School of Buddhism and Emptiness in the Autonomy School of Buddhism (unpublished,
undated manuscripts). The entire book has been translated in Robert A. F. Thurman, Tsong
Khapa’s Speech of Gold in the Essence of True Eloquence (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1984).

Preface 20
EDITIONS CONSULTED
Two basic editions of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis of the Per-
fection of Wisdom were consulted:
1. bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi mtha’ dpyod shes rab kyi
pha rol tu phyin pa’i don kun gsal ba’i rin chen sgron me, TBRC
W22186.6, which is a PDF of: bla brang bkra shis ’khyil, bla brang
brka shis ’khyil dgon, publishing date unknown. Abbreviated refer-
ence: “2011 TBRC bla brang.”
2. bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi mtha’ dpyod shes rab kyi
pha rol tu phyin pa’i don kun gsal ba’i rin chen sgron me. Published
at Go-mang College, date unknown. Abbreviated reference: “2015
Go-mang Lhasa,” so named because of being acquired in Lhasa, Tibet,
at Go-mang College in 2015 by Jongbok Yi for the UMA Institute for
Tibetan Studies.
The digital Tibetan text of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis of the
Perfection of Wisdom provided in this book was supplied by the
Drepung Gomang Library of Go-mang College in Mundgod, State,
India, which was likely based on both of above editions. It has been
edited primarily in accordance with the “2011 TBRC bla brang.”

Technical Notes
It is important to recognize that:
translations and editions of texts are given in the Bibliography;
the names of Indian Buddhist schools of thought are translated into
English in a wish to increase accessibility for non-specialists;
for the names of Indian scholars and systems used in the body of the
text, ch, sh, and ṣh are used instead of the more usual c, ś, and ṣ for the
sake of easy pronunciation by non-specialists; however, cch is used
for cch, not chchh. Within parentheses the usual transliteration system
for Sanskrit is used;
transliteration of Tibetan is done in accordance with a system devised
by Turrell Wylie; see “A Standard System of Tibetan Transcription,”
Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies, 22 (1959): 261-267;
the names of Tibetan authors and orders are given in “essay phonetics”
for the sake of easy pronunciation; the system is aimed at internet
searchability;
titles of added subsections are given in square brackets;
definitions are in bold type.

The Collaborator
Lo-sang-gyal-tshan is a Ge-she at Go-mang College of Dre-pung Monastic
University, Mundgod, Karnataka State, India, who also served a six-month
term as Disciplinarian at the Tantric College of Lower Lhasa in Hunsur,
India. In October, 2015, he assumed the position of Abbot of Go-mang
College of Dre-pung Monastic University in Mundgod, India. He has
worked with translators of the UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies since
2013. In particular, he provided crucial assistance with filling in the dia-
lectical moves throughout the text and by responding to questions and en-
gaging in discussions about the meaning.

Jam-yang-shay-pa’s
Decisive Analysis of (Maitreya’s) “Or-
nament for the Clear Realizations”
The Tibetan text and the translation are highlighted in three colors: black,
blue, and red. Blue print presents what Jam-yang-shay-pa considers to be
right positions, while red print represents what Jam-yang-shay-pa consid-
ers to be wrong positions. Words in black are other information or function
structurally. In the Tibetan, a turquoise background indicates material
added in place of ellipses, and a magenta highlight sets off the ellipsis in-
dicator when it has been filled in.

Decisive Analysis of the Treatise (Maitreya’s) “Ornament
for the Clear Realizations”: Precious Lamp Illuminating
All the Topics of the Perfection of Wisdoma
༄༅། །བསྟན་བཅོས་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་རྒྱན་གྱི་མཐའ་དཔྱོད་
ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་དོན་ཀུན་གསལ་བའི་རིན་ཆེན་
སྒྲོན་མེ་ཞེས་བྱ་བ་ལེགས་པར་བཞུགས་སོ། །
[Stanzas of Homage]
With faith, having taken him as a crown ornament, I make a
heartfelt bow
To the feet of the all-excellent tutor Mañjushrī who throws light
On the teaching in general of the Sage like [the sun] in charge of
the twelve constellations of the zodiac,
And on the topic of the Mother [Perfection of Wisdom] that
gives birth to the four supreme offspring.b
འོད་ལྡན་བཅུ་གཉིས་བདག་བཞིན་ཐུབ་པའི་བསྟན། །
Jam-yang-shay-pa Ngag-wang-tsön-drü’s ('jam dbyangs bzhad pa ngag dbang brtson
grus, 1648-1722) Decisive Analysis / Decisive Analysis of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the
Clear Realizations”: Precious Lamp Illuminating All the Topics of the Perfection of Wis-
dom (mtha' dpyod / bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi mtha’ dpyod shes rab kyi
pha rol tu phyin pa’i don kun gsal ba’i rin chen sgron me). The title is written in Sanskrit
transliterated first in in the ornamental letters of the lan tsha (rañja/rañjana) script, then
transliterated in Tibetan capital (dbu can) letters, and finally translated in Tibetan letters.
The Sanskrit version is: prajñāpāramitānāṃ sarvārtharkaśaṃkṛtasya ratna-pradīpa-
nāma-śāstraḥ abhisamaya-alaṃkara-samanta-vicica viharati sma.
The translation of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s stanzas, some of which are quite difficult to con-
strue, is based on Mu-ge-sam-tan’s (bsam gtan rgya mtsho/dmu dge bsam gtan, 1914-1993)
A Beautiful Garland of Glosses for the Stanzas in Jam-pal-yang-shay-pay-dor-je’s “Deci-
sive Analysis of the Perfection of Wisdom” ('jam dpal dbyangs dngos bzhad pa'i rdo rje'i
phar phyin mtha' dpyod kyi snyan ngag gi tshigs bcad rnams kyi tshig 'grel me tog 'phreng
mdzes) in bsam gtan rgya mtsho's gsung 'bum, vol. 2 (Zi ling: mtsho sngon mi rigs dpe
skrun khang, 1997). The four supreme offspring are Hearers, Pratyekabuddhas, Bodhisatt-
vas, and Buddhas.
This stanza is also written in the three types of script. The Sanskrit is: bhānānaṃ
dvadaśātmab[h]aḥ muniśāsanā saḥ samaṇyaś catuputamotpanam mātārthan / kaskara
paridhara paṣ[ñ?]caśikhi paramacanau / namakara hṛdaya na śikhisaṃskṛta sārdhena.

26 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
སྤྱི་དང་སྲས་བཞི་མཆོག་བསྐྱེད་ཡུམ་དོན་ཀུན། ། [2a]
གསལ་མཛད་ཡོངས་འཛིན་འཇམ་དབྱངས་མཆོག་ཀུན་
ཞབས། །
དད་པས་སྤྱི་གཙུག་རྒྱན་བཅས་སྙིང་ནས་འདུད། ། [2b]
Even from the first time you became a Bodhisattva you were in-
comparable because of the courage
Of your supreme surpassing aspiration, and the reverberations of
the Bodhisattvas’ marvelous melodious praise
Of you as “The While Lotus” filled all the directions. Please,
Kinsman of the Sun, incomparable
Lion of the Shākyas rest the nails of your toes in the lotus lake
center of my heart place.a
ལྷག་བསམ་སྙིང་སྟོབས་མཆོག་གིས་རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཐོག་མའི་དུས་
ནས་ཀྱང་། །
ཟླ་བྲལ་ཁྱོད་ནི་པད་དཀར་འདྲ་ཞེས་རྒྱལ་རྣམས་རྨད་བྱུང་
བའི། ། [3a]
བསྔགས་བརྗོད་གྲགས་སྙན་མཁའ་བཞིན་ཕྱོགས་ཀུན་ཁྱབ་
མཛད་ཉི་མའི་གཉེན། །
མཉམ་མེད་ཤཱཀྱ་སེང་གེའི་ཞབས་སེན་སྙིང་དབུས་པད་མཚོར་
བཞུགས། ། [3b]
I bow to the feet of that Protector’s ambassador,
The Undaunted (ajita) Protector [Maitreya] conqueror of the four
Māras
Who simultaneously sustains all the hundred ten million conti-
nents with the doctrine,
This stanza is also written in the three types of script. The Sanskrit is: adyāśāya hraṃ
dāvalaṃ tam ji naḥ putraḥ prathāmād icā/ vemaivata hi buṇnarīka sami bhaḥ aiheḥ jānaṃ
aho / uñjanaḥ yaś ākaśaivadikaśāvlikāra śoddhadaniḥ śākyassiddhavadanam khaḥsya na
samaḥ hṛītādmsāraṃ vihar.

Expression of Worship 27
Who directly perceives the three secrets of the Sage.
མགོན་དེའི་རྒྱལ་ཚབ་བྱེ་བ་ཕྲག་བརྒྱའི་གླིང་། །
མ་ལུས་གཅིག་ཆར་ཆོས་ཀྱིས་སྐྱོང་མཛད་པའི། །
ཐུབ་པའི་གསང་གསུམ་མངོན་གྱུར་བདུད་བཞི་ལས། །
རྒྱལ་བ་མི་ཕམ་མགོན་པོའི་ཞབས་ལ་འདུད། །
I bow to [Mañjushrī] the single father who is fully enlightened
from an infinite beginning but still,
Because of the power of his prayers, in the form of a Bodhisattva
produces all the Victors, the guides.
Hey! Please bestow on me the intelligence
That makes clear all the topics in the Mother [Perfection of Wis-
dom].
དཔག་མེད་གདོད་ནས་མངོན་པར་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱང་། །
སྨོན་དབང་རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཚུལ་གྱིས་རྣམ་འདྲེན་ཀུན། །
སྐྱེད་མཛད་རྒྱལ་བའི་ཡབ་གཅིག་ལ་འདུད་ཀྱེ། །
ཡུམ་དོན་མ་ལུས་གསལ་བའི་བློ་གྲོས་སྩོལ། །
Please Sarasvatī, nimbly nimbly unravel the knotty difficult
points for me,
You who just from a moment of sincerely sincere belief
Bestow the supreme crown jewel of a scholar’s scholarship that
makes
More and more of all types of knowledge dawn clearly on an ig-
norant heart.
དུང་དུང་ལན་རེ་མོས་ཀྱང་རྨོངས་པའི་སྙིང་། །
མང་མང་ཤེས་བྱའི་གཟུགས་ཀུན་གསལ་འཆར་བའི། །
མཁས་མཁས་གཙུག་ནོར་མཆོག་སྟེར་དབྱངས་ཅན་ཀྱེ། །
ལྷུག་ལྷུག་དཀའ་གནད་མདུད་གྲོལ་ངག་སྩོལ་ཅིག །

28 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Thinking how hard it is to realize the topics of the Mother [Per-
fection of Wisdom] Asaṅgaa meditated
And achieved in twelve years the great stream of the Gaṅgā river
of Maitreya’s tradition,
Spreading it from the world of gods through all the human
worlds.
You and your brother [Vasubandhu] are the eyes of living be-
ings.b
ཡུམ་དོན་དཀའ་སྙམ་བཅུ་གཉིས་ལོར་བསྒྲུབས་པའི། །
མི་ཕམ་གསུང་རྒྱུན་གང་གཱའི་ཆུ་ཀླུང་ཆེ། །
ལྷ་ཡི་ཡུལ་ནས་མི་ཡུལ་མ་ལུས་པར། །
ཁྱབ་མཛད་ཐོགས་མེད་སྐུ་མཆེད་འགྲོ་བའི་མིག །
The fame of Āryavimuktisenac and Haribhadrad who captivate
the minds
Of humans and gods, a fragrant smell wafting from the sandal-
wood trees learned in exposition
In dense jungles of eloquent explanations in the middle of Indian
mountain ranges
Of authors of Perfection of Wisdom commentaries rises up even
above the Peak of Existence.
འཕགས་ཡུལ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་འགྲེལ་མཛད་ས་འཛིན་དབུས། །
Asaṅga, thogs med fl. c. 350-400(?).
Vasubandhu, dbyig gnyen fl. c. 350-400(?).
'phags pa rnam grol sde, fl. 5th-6th century? At the end of the only extant Sanskrit man-
uscript (Nepal-German Ms. Preservation Project, Reel no. A37/9, folio 110b3) he gives his
name as āryavimuktiṣeṇa (śākya-bhikṣor ārya-vimuktiṣeṇasya kaurukulyārya-sa-
matīyasyānekodāra-vihārasthāsyācārya-buddha-dāsa-naptuḥ); this spelling is corrobo-
rated by Haribhadra’s spelling (Wogihara, 1, line 20). However, on his title page Corrado
Pensa in L'Abhisamayālaṃkāravṛtti di Ārya-vimuktisena (Roma: Istituto Italiano per il Me-
dio ed Estremo Oriente, 1967) gives his name as Āryavimuktisena, as does Karl Brunnho-
ëlzl in Gone Beyond (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2011). Earlier (except on the
title pages of my translations) I have given his name as Ārya Vimuktisena as has John
Makransky in Buddhahood Embodied (Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press,
1997), and James Apple in Stairway to Nirvāna (Albany, N.Y.: State University of New
York Press, 2009). I have come prefer Āryavimuktiṣeṇa, but throughout this publication I
am using the format of the UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies which is Āryavimuktisena.
seng ge bzang po, fl. c. end of 8th century.

Expression of Worship 29
འཆད་མཁས་ཙན་དན་དྲི་བསུང་ངད་འཐུལ་བའི། །
ལེགས་བཤད་ནགས་ཀླུང་སྟུག་པོས་ལྷ་མིའི་ཡིད། །
འཕྲོག་མཛད་འཕགས་སེང་གྲགས་སྙན་སྲིད་རྩེ་བརྒལ། །
The translators and paṇḍitas, the kings and the ministers, and
particularly all the many learned beings
Who disseminated Perfection of Wisdom texts, radiating out the
illumination of the Doctrine
Into these valleys when they were sunk in the gloom of igno-
rance even while surrounded
By [white sparkling] snow mountains––they are all objects of
homage.
གངས་རིས་བསྐོར་ཡང་རྨོངས་པའི་མུན་འཐིབས་པའི། །
ལྗོངས་འདིར་ཆོས་སྣང་སྤྲོ་མཛད་ལོ་པཎ་དང་། །
རྒྱལ་བློན་ཀུན་དང་ཁྱད་པར་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གཞུང་། །
སྤེལ་མཛད་མཁས་མང་མ་ལུས་ཕྱག་གི་ཡུལ། །
I pay homage with reverence to the banner raised up on high in
mundane existence
By [Tsong-kha-paa with] a Good Mind (Lo-sang) Famous (Drag-
pa) as the [second] Victor
Who, as prophesied by the Sage, in a human performance of
Mañjushrī established [his time in this degenerate age] as a
golden age
By doing all of a Buddha’s deeds, by [explaining] scripture and
[accomplishing] realization [of doctrine], and by putting the
three trainings into practice and so on.
ཐུབ་པའི་ལུང་ལྟར་འཇམ་དབྱངས་མི་ཡི་བཟློས་གར་གྱིས།།
སངས་རྒྱས་མཛད་པ་ ལུང་རྟོགས་བསླབ་གསུམ་ལག་ལེན་
[4a]
སོགས། །
tsong kha pa blo bzang grags pa, 1357-1419.

30 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
མཐའ་དག་རྫོགས་ལྡན་ལ་བཀོད་བློ་བཟང་རྒྱལ་བ་ཞེས། །
གྲགས་པའི་བ་དན་སྲིད་ན་མཐོ་བར་གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ། །
I pay homage to that [second] Victor’s Ambassador (Gyal-
tshab),a the Dharma lord (Je) endowed
With the seven jewels (Rin-chen) who is [friend to] all the off-
spring of that lord, who, having found
The exalted wisdom that understood his [Tsong-kha-pa’s] system
just as he spoke it,
Saw all dharmas as they really are and excellently taught it to
transmigrating beings.
མགོན་དེའི་སྲས་རྣམས་ཀུན་དང་གང་གི་ལུགས། །
གསུང་བཞིན་མཁྱེན་རབ་དར་བས་མ་ལུས་ཆོས། །
ཇི་བཞིན་གཟིགས་པས་འགྲོ་ལ་ལེགས་སྟོན་པའི། །
རྒྱལ་ཚབ་རིན་ཆེན་བདུན་ལྡན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་རྗེ། །
And I pay homage to the single friend and leader of transmigrat-
ing beings at the summit of the topknots
Of ten million scholar practitioners (Khay-drub),b who has a glo-
rious excellent goodness (Ge-leg-pal)
As pervading master [Vajra] holder of a hundred families [of tan-
tra], and as a scholar and religious person
Is a good man (Zang-po) perfectly established as endowed with
all good fortune.
མཁས་གྲུབ་བྱེ་བའི་རལ་པའི་ཐོར་ཅོག་རྩེར། །
རིགས་བརྒྱའི་ཁྱབ་བདག་དགེ་ལེགས་དཔལ་འཆང་ཞབས།།
མཁས་བཙུན་བཟང་པོས་ལེགས་བཀོད་སྐལ་ལྡན་ཀུན། །
འདྲེན་མཛད་འགྲོ་བའི་གཉེན་གཅིག་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ། །
I pay homage with reverence to the two, the father Victor [Paṇ-
Gyal-tshab dar-ma-rin-chen (rgyal tshab darma rin chen, 1364-1432).
Khay-drub-ge-leg-pal-zang-po (mkhas grub dge legs dpal bzang po, 1385–1438).

Expression of Worship 31
chen Lo-sang-chö-kyi-gyal-tshan]a and his sons,
The succession of emanation bodies [down to the Great Fifth Da-
lai Lama]b
Who spread wide over the whole ocean-clad earth the yellow-hat
tradition of teachings
Famous as a banner flying magnificently in mundane existence.
སྤྲུལ་པའི་རབས་ཀྱིས་ཞྭ་སེར་རིང་ལུགས་བསྟན། །
རྒྱ་མཚོའི་གོས་ཅན་མ་ལུས་ཁྱབ་བྱས་པས། །
གྲགས་པའི་བ་དན་སྲིད་ན་ལྷང་ངེ་བ། །
རྒྱལ་བ་ཡབ་སྲས་གཉིས་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་ལོ། །
Through good fortune have I found this celestial wish-fulfilling
tree
Hung with a net of ten million jewels of scripture and reasoning,
Fragrant with superior language pervading the ten directions,
And giving forth all the desired perfection of wisdom topics.
ལུང་རིགས་རིན་ཆེན་བྱེ་བའི་དྲ་བ་འཕྱངས། །
རྗོད་བྱེད་ཁྱད་འཕགས་དྲི་བཟང་ཕྱོགས་བཅུར་ཁྱབ། །
དོན་གྱི་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་འདོད་པ་ཀུན་སྟེར་བའི། །
རྣམ་སད་དཔག་བསམ་ལྗོན་པ་སྐལ་བས་རྙེད། །
Some get puffed up just from seeing the words, certain others
Just plagiarize what has already been said, and most shoot ar-
rows while in the dark
About the words and meanings. I am not explaining here those
disputatious works
Written out of attachment and hatred because they are not worth
refuting.
ལ་ལ་ཚིག་ཙམ་མཐོང་བས་རློམ་སེམས་བྱེད། །
འགའ་ཞིག་ཟེར་སྒྲོས་བྲིས་ཤིང་ཕལ་ཆེར་གྱིས། །
paṇ chen blo bzang chos kyi rgyal mtshan 1570–1662.
Ngag-wang-lo-sang-gya-tsho (ngag dbang blo bzang rgya mtsho, 1617–1682).

32 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
ཚིག་དོན་མུན་མདའ་འཕངས་ལ་ཆགས་སྡང་གིས། །
རྩོད་ཡིག་དགག་ཡུལ་མིན་ཕྱིར་འདིར་མི་འཆད། །
Without conceit, out of compassion I am explaining here with
scripture and reasoning
The topics of the Mother [Perfection of Wisdom] spoken by our
Teacher [the Buddha]
As explained by his ambassador [Maitreya], as in the great chari-
ots’ systems that I discovered
Through the kindness of eminent persons, so you who are intelli-
gent should listen.
ཡུམ་དོན་སྟོན་པས་གསུངས་དང་རྒྱལ་ཚབ་ཀྱིས། །
བཀྲལ་བཞིན་ཤིང་རྟ་ཆེན་པོའི་ལུགས་བཞིན་དུ། །
དམ་པའི་དྲིན་གྱིས་རྙེད་དེ་ལུང་རིགས་ཀྱིས། །
རློམ་བྲལ་བརྩེ་བས་ འདིར་འཆད་བློ་ལྡན་ཉོན། །
[4b]

1. Openers of the Chariot-ways
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད།
Our incomparable Teacher himself first generated the aspirational mind
[toward enlightenment] in the bodya [of a person] in a hell, then from [a
ritual given by] Mahā Shākyamuni while the [Brahmin] boy Illuminator,b
he generated the practical mind [toward enlightenment]. Then, he accu-
mulated the collections [of merit and wisdom] for three countless eons,
and finally, in the body [of a person] in the Highestc [Pure Land], reached
Buddhahood. As a supreme emanation body, here on this [Rose-apple
(jambu)] Continent he set forth 84,000 heaps and doors of doctrine,
amongst which the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras are supreme because
Dharmamitra’s Clear Words says:d
Amongst all the 84,000 heaps of doctrine spoken [by the Buddha]
the best, perfect, foremost, and consummate are just these Perfec-
tion of Wisdom Sūtras.
དེ་ལ་འདིར་བདག་ཅག་གི་སྟོན་པ་མཉམ་མེད་དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་དང་
པོར་དམྱལ་བའི་རྟེན་ལ་སྨོན་སེམས་དང་། ཁྱེའུ་སྣང་བྱེད་ཀྱི་དུས་
ཤཱཀྱ་ཐུབ་པ་ཆེན་པོ་ལས་འཇུག་སེམས་བསྐྱེད་ཅིང་། དེ་ནས་
གྲངས་མེད་གསུམ་གྱི་ཚོགས་བསགས་ཤིང་། མཐར་འོག་མིན་གྱི་
རྟེན་ལ་སངས་རྒྱས་ཏེ། གླིང་འདིར་མཆོག་གི་སྤྲུལ་སྐུས་ཆོས་ཀྱི་
ཕུང་པོ་དང་སྒོ་བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང་གསུངས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་
མཆོག་ནི་ཤེར་མདོ་ཡིན་ཏེ། ཚིག་གསལ་ལས། ཆོས་ཀྱི་ཕུང་པོ་
བརྒྱད་ཁྲི་བཞི་སྟོང་གསུངས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་ཀྱི་ནང་ནས་རབ་
rten, or “life-support.”
Bhāskara (snang byed).
Akaṇiṣṭha ('og min).
Dharmamitra’s Explanation of (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Orna-
ment for the Clear Realizations’”: Clear Words (abhisamayālaṃkārakārikāprajñāpāram-
itopadeśaśāstraṭīkā prasphuṭapadā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan
bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi tshig le’ur byas pa’i ’grel bshad tshig rab tu gsal ba),
lha sa, shes phyin, nya, 2a.7-2b.1.

34 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
དང་། ཕུལ་དང་། གཙོ་བོ་དང་། གྱ་ནོམ་པ་ཉིད་དུ་གྱུར་པ་ནི་ཤེས་
རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་མདོ་ཉིད་དེ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
Regarding the commentaries on the thought of those [Perfection of Wis-
dom Sūtras], there are many because:
there are:1
1. Nāgārjuna’s Collections of Reasoning,a
2. Dignāga’s Summary of the “Eight Thousand Perfection of
Wisdom Sūtra,”b
3. Kashmiri Daṃṣhṭasena’s Conquest Over Harm,c and
The six are:
1. Treatise on the Middle, prajñānāmamūlamadhyamakakārikā, dbu ma rtsa ba’i tshig
le’ur byas pa shes rab,
2. Refutation of Objections, vigrahavyāvartanīkārikā, rtsod pa bzlog pa’i tshig le’ur
byas pa,
3. Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness, śūnyatāsaptatikārikā, stong pa nyid bdun cu pa’i tshig
le’ur byas pa,
4. Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning, yuktiṣaṣṭikākārikā, rigs pa drug cu pa’i tshig le’ur byas
pa,
5. Treatise Called the Finely Woven, vaidalyasūtranāma, zhib mo rnam par ’thag pa
zhes bya ba’i mdo.
The sixth, according to Gyal-tshab Dar-ma-rin-chen’s Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Orna-
ment for the Clear Realizations” and (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary” (shes rab kyi pha rol
tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi 'grel pa don gsal ba'i
rnam bshad snying po'i rgyan/ rnam bshad snying po rgyan) is Precious Garland of Advice
for the King (rājaparikathāratnāvalī, rgyal po la gtam bya ba rin po che’i phreng ba).
According to Tsong-kha-pa’s Extensive Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintes-
sential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Realizations” as
Well as (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary:” Golden Garland of Eloquence/ Golden Garland
of Eloquence (shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs
pa’i rgyan ’grel pa dang bcas pa’i rgya cher bshad pa legs bshad gser gyi phreng ba),
others say the sixth is Totally Fearless (mūlamadhyamakavṛttyakutobhaya / akutobhaya,
dbu ma rtsa ba'i 'grel pa ga las 'jigs med).
prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtha, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin ma bsdus pa'i tshig le'ur byas pa
/ brgyad stong bsdus don. The Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra is the
aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa.
Daṃṣhṭasena’s Extensive Explanation of the Superior One Hundred Thousand, Twenty-
five Thousand, and Eighteen Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras / Conquest Over Harm
concerning the Three Mothers (āryaśatasāhasrikāpañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāṣṭādaśasāhas-
rikā-prajñāpāramitā-bṭhaṭṭīkā, 'phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa 'bum pa dang
nyi khri lnga stong pa dang khri brgyad stong pa’i rgya cher bshad pa / yum gsum gnod
'jom / gnod 'jom che ba), Peking 5206, vol. 93. The Three Mothers are the One Hundred

Openers of the Chariot-ways 35
4. the Foremost Holya (Maitreya’s) Ornament for the Clear Re-
alizationsb
renowned to earlier Tibetans as the four openers of the chariot-
ways [that is, openers of the path for different traditions of expla-
nation],
and in terms of the actual fact, in accordance with the Teachings of
Akṣhayamati Sūtra,c the commentaries abide in two [types]—a mode
of commentary on the explicit teaching, emptiness, and a mode of
commentary on the hidden meaning, the clear realizations.
[ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་མདོ་]དེའི་དགོངས་པ་འགྲེལ་པ་ལ་དུ་མ་
ཡོད་དེ། བོད་སྔ་མ་ལ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཚོགས་དང་། ཕྱོགས་གླང་
གི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་དོན་བསྡུས་དང་། ཁ་ཆེ་མཆེ་བའི་སྡེའི་གནོད་
འཇོམས་དང་། རྗེ་བཙུན་གྱི་མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་དང་བཞི་ལ་ཤིང་
རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་བཞིར་གྲགས་པ་དང་། གནས་ཚོད་ལ་བློ་གྲོས་མི་
ཟད་པའི་མདོ་ལྟར་དངོས་བསྟན་སྟོང་ཉིད་བཀྲལ་ཚུལ་དང་།
སྦས་དོན་མངོན་རྟོགས་བཀྲལ་ཚུལ་གཉིས་སུ་གནས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
There are ways in which the first four comment [on the thought of those
Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras] because:
1. Nāgārjuna comments [on the thought of those Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtras] in the six Collections of Reasoning that refute a tru[ly estab-
Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra (śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol
tu phyin pa stong phrag brgya pa); Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra
(pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi
shu lnga pa); and Eighteen Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra aṣṭādaśasāhasrikā-
prajñāpāramitā, 'phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa khri brgyad stong pa).
rje btsun.
Stanza Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament
for the Clear Realizations (abhisamayālaṃkāra / abhisamayālaṁkāra-nāma-prajñāpāra-
mitopadeśaśāstrakārikā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon
par rtogs pa’i rgyan zhes bya ba'i tshig le'ur byas pa).
Teaching of Akṣhayamati Sūtra (akṣayamatinirdeśa, 'phags pa blo gros mi zad pas zhus
pas lung bstan pa). Jens Braavig (Akṣayamatinirdeśasūtra [Oslo: Solum Forlag, 1993])
has edited the Tibetan with Sanskrit fragments and provided an English translation.

36 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
lished] actuality, the proposition [taken up by our own and others’ Pro-
ponents of Truly Established Things];2
2. Dignāga comments on the Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom in
the manner of thirty-two topics;
3. Kashmiri Daṃṣhṭasena3 comments on the topics of the Three Mothers
in the manner of three approaches and eleven formats;
4. the Ornament for the Clear Realizations comments [on the thought of
those Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras] in the manner of eight categories.
For, Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:a
Though there are also many treatises that comment on the thought
of these [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras], the chief are “the four
great openers of the chariot-ways” renowned to earlier [Tibetans].
དང་པོ་བཞིས་བཀྲལ་ཚུལ་ཡོད་དེ། ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱིས་བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་བདེན་
དངོས་འགོག་པའི་རིགས་ཚོགས་དྲུག་དང་། ཕྱོགས་གླང་གིས་
བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པའི་དོན་སོ་གཉིས་སུ་བཀྲལ། ཁ་ཆེ་མཆེ་བའི་སྡེས་
ཡུམ་གསུམ་གྱི་དོན་སྒོ་གསུམ་དང་རྣམ་གྲངས་བཅུ་གཅིག་ཏུ་
བཀྲལ། མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་གྱིས་དངོས་པོ་བརྒྱད་དུ་བཀྲལ་བའི་
ཕྱིར། ལེགས་བཤད་གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། [ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་
པ་]འདིའི་ དགོངས་པ་འགྲེལ་བའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་ལ་ཡང་དུ་མ་
[5a]
ཞིག་ཡོད་ཀྱང་གཙོ་བོར་གྱུར་པ་ནི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཆེན་པོ་
Tsong-kha-pa’s Extensive Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Reali-
zation, Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom” as well as
(Haribhadra’s) Commentary: Golden Garland of Eloquence (shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin
pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan ’grel pa dang bcas pa’i rgya cher
bshad pa legs bshad gser gyi phreng ba), (zi ling: tsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang ed.,
1986 [the page numbers are the same as vols. tsa and tsha in the gsung 'bum/_tsong kha
pa/ (mtsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang /). TBRC W20510. 11: 11-519. zi ling: mtsho
sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1999.
lease6/flat/S5412I1_T.TXT), tsa, 3b.,6; English translation by Gareth Sparham, Golden
Garland of Eloquence, vols. 1-4 (Fremont, CA: Jain Publishing Company, 2008-2013),
vol. 1, 5. Hereafter cited as Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland; mtsho sngon edition, ACIP
edition; Sparham, Golden Garland.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 37
བཞི་ཞེས་སྔ་མ་རྣམས་ལ་གྲགས་སོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The first [which is that the way Nāgārjuna comments on the thought of
those Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras in the six Collections of Reasoning that
refute a tru(ly established) actuality, the proposition (taken up by our own
and others’ Proponents of Truly Established Things)] is established be-
cause there are the six:
1. the Treatise on the Middle, refuting [in general the proposition of]
tru[ly established] actualities [by our own and others’ Proponents of
Truly Established Things]4
2. the Refutation of Objections, an extension of the meaning of the first
chapter of that [Treatise on the Middle]
3. the Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness, an extension of the meaning of
chapter seven
4&5. both the Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning and the Precious Garland, refut-
ing the tru[ly established] actualities [propounded] by our own [Bud-
dhist] parties in particular5
6. the Treatise Called the Finely Woven [or Fine Pulverization Treatise],
refuting the logicians’ sixteen categories of proofs of tru[ly estab-
lished] actualities.
དང་པོ་[ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱིས་བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་བདེན་དངོས་འགོག་པའི་རིགས་ཚོགས་དྲུག་ཏུ་
བཀྲལ་ཚུལ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་བདེན་དངོས་འགོག་པའི་རྩ་ཤེ་དང་།
[རྩ་ཤེ་]དེའི་རབ་བྱེད་དང་པོའི་འཕྲོས་དོན་རྩོད་ཟློག་དང་། རབ་
བྱེད་བདུན་པའི་འཕྲོས་དོན་སྟོང་ཉིད་བདུན་ཅུ་པ་དང་། རང་
སྡེའི་བདེན་དངོས་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་འགོག་པ་རིགས་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ་པ། རིན་
ཆེན་ཕྲེང་བ་གཉིས་དང་ལྔ། བདེན་དངོས་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་རྟོག་གེའི་
ཚིག་དོན་བཅུ་དྲུག་འགོག་པ་ཞིབ་མོ་རྣམ་འཐག་དང་དྲུག་ཡོད་
པའི་ཕྱིར།
Furthermore, Khay-drub-ge-leg-pal-sang’s General Presentation of

38 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
the Tantra Setsa explains that the Foremost Holy Ren-da-wab asserts five
Khay-drub-ge-leg-pal-sang’s Extensive Explanation of the General Presentation of the
Tantra Sets (rgyud sde bzhi’i rnam par bzhag pa rgyas pa bshad pa); see Ferdinand D.
Lessing and Alex Wayman, Mkhas Grub Rje’s Fundamentals of the Buddhist Tantras (The
Hague: Mouton, 1968), rpt. (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1978), 86 and 87.
Ren-da-wa Shön-nu-lo-drö (red mda' ba gzhon nu blo gros, 1349-1412) in his [Commen-
tary on Chandrakīrti’s] Supplement to [Nāgārjuna's “Root Stanzas on] the Middle Way
[called 'Wisdom']” (dbu ma la 'jug pa), Rje btsun red mda' ba gzhon nu blo gros zhabs kyi
gsung 'bum pod lnga pa (Sa skya'i dpe rnying bsdu sgrig khang: 2009), 21-22; the relevant
section in which Ren-da-wa does not mention the Precious Garland is:
Nāgārjuna’s works are twofold: commentaries on the profound view factor and
commentaries on the vast activities factor. Nāgārjuna’s commentaries on the pro-
found view factor, moreover, are twofold: treatises for cutting off superimposi-
tions with [wisdom arisen from] hearing and thinking and quintessential instruc-
tions for practice with [wisdom] arisen from meditation. Nāgārjuna’s treatises
for cutting off superimpositions with [wisdom arisen from] hearing and thinking,
moreover, are threefold: texts excising (tshar gcod pa) wrong statements, texts
looking after the fortunate, and texts engendering respect for the Teacher. Nāgār-
juna’s texts excising wrong statements are the Collections of Reasoning because
they repudiate with reasons all eternalist and nihilistic statements of our own
[Buddhist] and other [Nonbuddhist] schools…Amongst these, Nāgārjuna’s Col-
lections of Reasoning is twofold: refuting propositions of truly established actu-
alities and refuting the reasoning of logicians proving [such]. Also, Nāgārjuna’s
texts refuting the proposition of a truly established actuality are twofold: demon-
strations of refutations of others' systems that are stated as positive inclusions
(yongs gcod, pariccheda) and a dispelling of objections to our own system stated
as a mere negation (rnam bcad, vyavaccheda). Also, Nāgārjuna’s texts demon-
strating refutations of others' systems that are stated as positive inclusions are
twofold: a refutation of both our own and others' systems in common and a spe-
cific refutation of our own systems. Nāgārjuna’s text refuting both our own and
others' systems in common is the Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Called
Wisdom. Nāgārjuna’s text specifically refuting our own systems is the Sixty Stan-
zas of Reasoning. Also, Nāgārjuna’s texts dispelling objections to our own sys-
tem stated as a mere negation is twofold: the Refutation of Objections dispels in
general the objection that propounding the absence of inherent existence contra-
dicts reasoning, and the Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness dispels in particular that
propounding that compounded things are not produced and do not disintegrate
contradicts scripture…The second, Nāgārjuna’s text refuting the reasoning of lo-
gicians proving [propositions of truly established actualities], is the Treatise
Called the Finely Woven.
སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་གཞུང་རྣམས་ཀྱང་ཟབ་མོ་ལྟ་བའི་ཆ་འགྲེལ་པ་དང་། རྒྱ་ཆེན་སྤྱོད་པའི་
ཆ་འགྲེལ་པ་གཉིས་སུ་གནས་སོ། ། དང་པོ་ལའང་ཐོས་བསམ་གྱིས་སྒྲོ་འདོགས་གཅོད་
པའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་དང་། སྒོམ་བྱུང་གིས་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་པའི་མན་ངག་གཉིས་སོ། ། དང་
པོ་ལའང་། ལོག་སྨྲ་ཚར་གཅོད་པ་དང་། སྐལ་ལྡན་རྗེས་སུ་འཛིན་པ་དང་། སྟོན་པ་ལ་

Openers of the Chariot-ways 39
Collections of Reasoning and that the Foremost Precious [Tsong-kha-pa]
asserts six as above.
It follows that a certain [Avalokitavrata’s]6 making the Totally Fear-
less into one of the Collections of Reasonings is not logically correct be-
cause this [Totally Fearless]7 is not an autocommentary on Nāgārjuna’s
Fundamental Treatise on the Middle Called Wisdom because it cites as a
source [Nāgārjuna’s student],b “Also the holy Āryadeva[…].”
དེ་ཡང་རྗེ་བཙུན་རེད་མདའ་པས་རིགས་ཚོགས་ལྔ་དང་རྗེ་རིན་
པོ་ཆེས་སྔར་ལྟར་དྲུག་བཞེད་པར་རྒྱུད་སྡེ་སྤྱི་རྣམ་ལས་བཤད་
དོ། །ཁ་ཅིག་ག་ལེ་འཇིགས་མེད་རིགས་ཚོགས་གཅིག་ཏུ་བྱེད་པ་
མི་འཐད་པར་ཐལ། [འགྲེལ་པ་ག་ལེ་འཇིགས་མེད་]དེ་རྩ་ཤེའི་རང་
འགྲེལ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། བཙུན་པ་འཕགས་པ་ལྷས་ཀྱང་ཞེས་
གུས་པ་སྐྱེད་པའི་གཞུང་གསུམ་དུ་གནས་སོ། ། དང་པོ་ནི་དབུ་མ་རིགས་པའི་ཚོགས་
རྣམས་ཏེ། དེ་དག་གིས་རང་གཞན་གི་སྡེ་པ་རྟག་ཆད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ་མཐའ་དག་རིགས་པས་
སུན་འབྱིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །…དེ་ལ་དབུ་མ་རིགས་པའི་ཚོགས་རྣམས་ནི་བསྒྲུབ་བྱ་བདེན་
དངོས་འགོག་པ་དང་། སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་རྟོག་གེའི་རིགས་པ་འགོག་པ་གཉིས་སོ། ། དང་པོ་
ལའང་། གཞན་ལུགས་ཡོངས་[22]བཅོད་དུ་སྨྲ་བ་ལ་དགག་པ་བསྟན་པ་དང་། རང་
ལུགས་རྣམ་ཙམ་སྨྲས་པ་ལ་རྩོད་པ་སྤང་བ་གཉིས་སོ། ། དང་པོ་ལའང་རང་བཞན་གྱི་སྡེ་
པ་གཉིས་ཀ་ཐུན་མོང་དུ་དགག་པ་དང་། རང་སྡེ་བྱེ་བྲག་ཏུ་དགག་པ་གཉིས་ལས། དང་
པོ་ནི་དབུ་མ་རྩ་བའི་ཤེས་རབ་བོ། ། གཉིས་པ་ནི་རིགས་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ་པའོ། ། གཉིས་པ་
ལའང་། སྤྱིར་རང་བཞིན་མེད་པར་སྨྲས་པ་ལ་རིགས་པ་དང་འགལ་བ་སྤང་བ་རྟོད་པ་
ཟློག་པ། ཁྱད་པར་དུ་འདུས་བྱས་སྐྱེ་འཇིག་མེད་པར་སྨྲས་པ་ལ་ལུང་དང་འགལ་བ་སྤང་
བ་སྟོང་ཉིད་བདུན་ཅུ་པ་དང་གཉིས་སོ། །…གཉིས་པ་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་རྟོག་གེའི་རིགས་པ་
འགོགས་པ་ནི་ཞིབ་མོ་རྣམ་པར་འཐག་པ་སྟེ།
In the twelfth century, Ar Chang-chub-ye-shay (ar byang chub ye shes, fl. c. 1100) in his
Explanation of (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary on (Maitreya’s) 'Ornament for the Clear Re-
alizations'“ (mngon rtogs rgyan gyi 'grel pa rnam 'byed), Ar byang chub ye shes kyi gsung
chos skor: bka' gdams dpe dkon gces btus, 2. (Krung go'i bod rig pa dpe skrun khang, 2007),
293, already mentions “Six Collections of Reasoning,” though without listing them.
Totally Fearless (mūlamadhyamakavṛttyakutobhaya, dbu ma rtsa ba'i 'grel pa ga las 'jigs
med).
lha sa, dbu ma, tsa, 98a.6. The point is that a master would not cite his student.

40 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
ཤེས་བྱེད་དྲངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
The second [which is the way that Dignāga comments on the Eight
Thousand Perfection of Wisdom in the manner of thirty-two topics] exists
because it explains in the manner of thirty-two consisting of:
1. foundation [the speaker of the Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom]:8
our Teacher [Shākyamuni];
2. sphere of influence: his Bodhisattva and Hearer and Solitary Realizer
retinue;
3. actions [to be performed by the retinue]: how to practice the Mother
[Perfection of Wisdom];
4.-13. meditations [that are the objects practiced]: the ten;
14.-29. divisions [of the objects of those meditations]: the sixteen empti-
nesses;
30. signs [of erroneous and nonerroneous modes of practicing those]: the
signs of demonic activities and of irreversibility;
31. falling [where if practiced wrongly]: bad rebirth when having rejected
the perfection of wisdom;
32. benefit [of practicing well]: merit that comes from writing down the
Perfection of Wisdom, a merit greater than from filling up a trilliona
[worlds] with seven precious substances and offering that.
གཉིས་པ་[ཕྱོགས་གླང་གིས་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པའི་དོན་སོ་གཉིས་སུ་བཀྲལ་ཚུལ་]ཡོད་
དེ། རྟེན་སྟོན་པ་དང་། དབང་དུ་བྱ་བ་འཁོར་ཉན་རང་བྱང་
སེམས་དང་། ལས་ནི་ཡུམ་ལ་ཇི་ལྟར་སྤྱོད་པ་དང་། སྒོམ་པ་བཅུ་
དང་། རབ་དབྱེ་སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག་དང་། རྟགས་ནི་བདུད་ལས་
དང་ཕྱིར་མི་ལྡོག་བའི་རྟགས་དང་། ལྟུང་བ་ནི་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་སྤངས་ན་
ངན་འགྲོར་སྐྱེ་བ་དང་། ཕན་ཡོན་སྟོང་གསུམ་རིན་པོ་ཆེ་བདུན་
གྱིས་བཀང་བ་བྱིན་པས་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་བྲི་བ་བསོད་ནམས་ཆེ་བ་དང་
སོ་གཉིས་སུ་བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
For, Dignāga’s Summary of the “Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom
stong gsum, a thousand to the third power.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 41
Sūtra” says:a
[Buddhas] have expounded on the foundation, sphere of influence,
and actions along with meditations, divisions, signs, falling, and
benefit.
It treats the ten meditations and the sixteen emptinesses individually.
བརྒྱད་སྟོང་དོན་བསྡུས་ ལས། རྟེན་དང་དབང་དུ་བྱ་བ་
[5b]
དང་། །ལས་ནི་སྒོམ་པ་དང་བཅས་དང་། །རབ་དབྱེ་རྟགས་དང་
ལྟུང་བ་དང་། །ཕན་ཡོན་བཅས་པར་ཡང་དག་བརྗོད། །ཅེས་
གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། སྒོམ་པ་བཅུ་དང་སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག་རེ་རེ་
བྱས་སོ། །
The third [which is the way that Kashmiri Daṃṣhṭasena comments on
the topics of the Three Mothers in the manner of three approaches and
eleven formats] exists because:
the three approaches are described as:
1. The approach of condensed teaching of the topics of the Three Moth-
ers [that is, the brief, medium, and extensive Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtras] in four modes [about who, why, in what, and how Bodhisattvas
train in the Perfection of Wisdom] for those who understand through
mentioning the beginning,b is [the single sentence] after the [sūtra’s]
Introduction, [where the Supramundane Victor says]:c
prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtha, stanza 2; Tucci ed., “Minor Sanskrit Texts on the
Prajñāpāramitā: The Prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtham of Dignāga,” Journal of the Royal Asiatic
Society, 1947, 56:
āśrayaś cādhikāraś ca karma bhāvanayā saha / prabhedo liṅgam āpac ca
sānuśaṃsam udāhṛtaṃ
brgyad stong bsdus don; lha sa, shes phyin, pha, 292b.5.
In contrast to requiring elaboration on the aspects.
This is found, for example, in Haribhadra’s Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtra in Eight Chapters (pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu
phyin pa stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa/ le’u brgyad ma), lha sa, shes phyin, ga, 26a.1, which
is the basis of the translation by Edward Conze, The Large Sūtra on Perfect Wisdom
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975), (hereafter Conze, Large Sutra). This is
the version in Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, ed. with critical notes and introduc-

42 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Shāriputra, a great Bodhisattva who wants to fully know
all phenomena should make effort in the perfection of
wisdom.
2. Then, the [second] approach is from there up to the end of the exalted-
knowledge-of-all-aspects [section]a––a middle length teaching in the
ultimate mode for those who understand from an elaboration in as-
pects.
3. The [third] approach is the rest from there on, stemming from the
knowledge of paths [section up to the completion of the Sūtra] for the
sake of those who have a liking for words, explaining at length a teach-
ing in the two truths mode.
and the eleven formats are described as:
1. one format where [the Supramundane Victor] addresses and explains
to Shāriputra
2. then a format which is the explanation at length by Subhūti
3.-10. then the Shakra, Subhūti, Maitreya, Subhūti, Shakra, Subhūti, Mait-
reya, and Subhūti formats
11. then the format where Ānanda is [addressed by the Supramundane
Victor and] entrusted [with the Sūtra].
tion by Nalinaksha Dutt (Calcutta Oriental Series, 28, 1934), expanded by Takayasu Ki-
mura Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā (Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin, 1986, 2007,
2009), and made available online by Klaus Wille in the GRETIL resource at
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā (which he abbreviates as P) in the upper right and
left hand corners of each page. The citation here is from Conze, Large Sutra, 18. This is
the version of the Twenty-five Thousand usually cited by Tibetan writers, with the notable
exception of Dol-po-pa Shay-rab-gyal-tshan (dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan, 1292-1361).
Dol-po-pa, in his nyi khri le mang dang le brgyad pa'i mi 'dra ba'i khyad par che long so
drug ('Dzam-Thang Edition of the Collected Works of Kun-Mkhyen Dol-po-pa Shes-Rab-
Rgyal-Mtshan, ed. by Matthew Kapstein, Delhi: 1992, vol. ma, 189-216) compares the
versions of the Twenty-five Thousand in the Translation of the Word (the le mangs, Many
Chaptered Sūtra) and Translation of the Treatises (Haribhadra’s Translation of the Trea-
tises version the le'u brgyad ma, Eight Chapters) making it clear that he looks down on
Haribhadra’s work. Dol-po-pa admires Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations, a
work he says was written during the golden age (rdzogs ldan dus, kṛtayuga), but he says
Āryavimuktisena and Haribhadra’s explanations of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras were
composed during the age of degeneration (snyigs ma’i dus, kāliyuga) and actually harm the
doctrine. It is yet to be conclusively determined why Dol-po-pa opposed Haribhadra so
strongly. It may be an oblique criticism of Tibetan writers in the Sang-phu tradition who
privileged Haribhadra’s work in their commentaries, or it may be an oblique criticism of
the criteria employed by certain editors of the Tibetan canon like Bu-tön.
Conze, Large Sutra, 269.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 43
གསུམ་པ་[ཁ་ཆེ་མཆེ་བའི་སྡེས་ཡུམ་གསུམ་གྱི་དོན་སྒོ་གསུམ་དང་རྣམ་གྲངས་བཅུ་
གཅིག་ཏུ་བཀྲལ་ཚུལ་]ཡོད་དེ། ཡུམ་གསུམ་གྱི་དོན་གླེང་གཞི་ནས་
བརྩོན་པར་བྱའོ་འི་བར་གྱི་མགོ་སྨོས་པས་གོ་བ་ལ་ཚུལ་བཞིར་
བསྡུས་ཏེ་བསྟན་པའི་སྒོ་དང་། དེ་ནས་རྣམ་མཁྱེན་རྫོགས་ཀྱི་བར་
དུ་རྣམ་པར་སྤྲོས་ན་གོ་བ་ལ་དོན་དམ་པའི་ཚུལ་དུ་སྟོན་པ་
འབྲིང་དུ་བསྟན་པའི་སྒོ། དེ་མན་ཆད་ལྷག་མས་ཚིག་ལ་འཆེལ་
བའི་དོན་དུ་ལམ་ཤེས་ནས་བརྩམས་ཏེ་བདེན་གཉིས་ཀྱི་ཚུལ་དུ་
བསྟན་པ་རྒྱས་པར་བཤད་པའི་སྒོ་སྟེ་སྒོ་གསུམ་དང་། དང་པོ་ཤཱ་
རིའི་བུ་ལ་བཀའ་སྩལ་ནས་བཤད་པའི་རྣམ་གྲངས་གཅིག་དང་།
དེ་ནས་རབ་འབྱོར་གྱིས་རྒྱས་པར་བཤད་བའི་རྣམ་གྲངས་དང་།
དེ་ནས་བརྒྱ་བྱིན་དང་། རབ་འབྱོར་དང་། བྱམས་པ་དང་། རབ་
འབྱོར་དང་། བརྒྱ་བྱིན་དང་། རབ་འབྱོར་དང་། བྱམས་པ་དང་།
རབ་འབྱོར་དང་། དེ་ནས་ཀུན་དགའ་བོ་ལ་གཏད་པའི་རྣམ་
གྲངས་དང་བཅུ་གཅིག་ཏུ་བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ།
For, Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:a
The textual commentary Conquest Over Harm that is the Exten-
sive Explanation of the two, the Extensive and Medium-length,
and the Eighteen Thousand Mothers [that is, of the One Hundred
Thousand, Twenty-five Thousand, and Eighteen Thousand Perfec-
tion of Wisdom Sūtras] b comments on the Mothers in terms of
three approaches and eleven formats.
mtsho sngon edition, 5; ACIP edition, tsa, 4b.2; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 7.
There are two books called Conquest Over Harm (gnod ’joms), this one commenting on
the One Hundred Thousand, Twenty-five Thousand, and Eighteen Thousand Perfection of
Wisdom Sūtras (Peking 5206, vol. 93) and another one commenting only on the One Hun-
dred Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra (Peking 5205).

44 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། ཡུམ་རྒྱས་འབྲིང་གཉིས་དང་། ཁྲི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་
པའི་རྒྱ་ཆེར་བཤད་པ་གཞུང་འགྲེལ་གནོད་འཇོམས་ཀྱིས་ནི་སྒོ་
གསུམ་དང་རྣམ་གྲངས་བཅུ་གཅིག་གི་སྒོ་ནས་ཡུམ་འགྲེལ་བར་
བྱེད་དོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
Someonea says:9 This [textual commentary Conquest Over Harm concern-
ing the Three Mothers] is written by Vasubandhu.b
Dol-po-pa Shay-rab-gyal-tshan in his Explanation of Maitreya’s “Ornament for the
Clear Realizations”: Easy Realization of the Meaning of the Sūtras (shes rab kyi pha rol
tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan zhes bya ba’i rnam bshad
mdo’i don bde blag tu rtog[s] pa), 'Dzam-Thang Edition of the Collected Works of Kun-
Mkhyen Dol-po-pa Shes-Rab-Rgyal-Mtshan, ed. by Matthew Kapstein (Delhi: 1992, vol.
ma), 243-618.
The confusion over the author and name of this text arises because the name of the text
given in the catalogues does not match the name given in the text itself, and the catalogues
do not give an author.
This text is the second prajñāpāramitā commentary in the oldest catalogue (lhan kar
ma 515) (Adelheid Herrmann-Pfandt, Die lHan kar ma : ein früher Katalog der ins Ti-
betische übersetzten buddhistischen Texte. Kritische Neuausgabe mit Einleitung und Ma-
terialien (Verlag der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, Vienna 2008.
Denkschriften, Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften, philosophisch-historische
Klasse, number 367. Beiträge zur Kultur- und Geistesgeschichte Asiens, number 59), 293.
There it is called shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa 'bum dang nyi khri lnga stong dang khri
brgyad pa'i rgya cher bshad pa.
In the catalogue to the Peking edition (Suzuki 1955-61) number 5206 and so on this
text is called ’phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa ’bum pa dang nyi khri lnga stong
pa dang khri brgyad stong pa’i rgya cher bshad pa. The Sanskrit title given there
śatasāhasrikāpañcaviṃsatisāhasrikāṣṭādaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitābṛhaṭṭīkā may be
simply a reconstruction from the Tibetan title because there is no information about it in
the colophon beyond the statement that it was translated by the famous Ye-shay-day (ye
shes sde).
This text is better known by the name yum gsum gnod ’joms (Conquest Over Objec-
tions to the Three Mother [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras]). Elsewhere I have shortened
Conquest Over Objections to Defense for stylistic reasons. This name comes from the last
line of the text's opening stanza 'di yi gzhung 'grel gnod 'joms bya bar 'dod (dpe bsdur
edition, 645), “I want to make a commentary on the texts, [that is, the Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtras] to make a conquest over harm [that is, objections].” If one takes bya ba as short
for zhes bya ba it would be explicitly a title, “I want [to make] a commentary on the texts,
[that is, the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras,] called ‘Conquest Over Objections.’”
In the Mahāvyutpatti the term gzhung 'grel renders paddhati. Under this entry Monier-
Williams gives the translation “a well-trodden path.” There it is used to mean, amongst
other things, a particular type of commentary. The Mahāvyutpatti gives for gnod pa choms

Openers of the Chariot-ways 45
pa the word marditakaṇṭaka (“Thorn-crusher”), where a “thorn” (kaṇṭa) also has the same
sense as a “thorny argument;” cp. the similar compound marditaśatrukaṇṭakaḥ in the sad-
dharmapuṇḍarīkasūtra (Vaidya, 242.1); Tibetan dgra'i tsher ma dkrugs so, dam pa'i chos
pad ma dkar po'i mdo (lha sa, mdo sde, ja, 248b.1). Based on this probable Sanskrit recon-
struction, the title would be Well-trodden Path Crusher of Thorny Arguments [Against the
Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra(s)], or Well-trodden Path Conquest of Objections to the Three
Mother [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras]).
The name of the text is important for understanding why some say the author is
Vasubandhu. (I have discussed these issues in detail in “Demons on the Mother: Objections
to the Perfect Wisdom Sūtras in Tibet,” in Changing Minds. Contributions to the Study of
Buddhism and Tibet in Honor of Jeffrey Hopkins, ed. by Guy Newland (Ithaca: Snow Lion
Publications, 2001).
In the opening stanzas of his Illumination Commentary (abhisamayālaṃkāravyākhyā
ālokā, short Tibetan title rgyan snang, Illumination of the “Ornament”) Haribhadra makes
homage to (a) Vasubandhu whom he appears to slightly criticize: bhāvābhāva-
vibhāgapakṣa-nipuṇajñānābhimānonnataḥ / ācāryo vasubandhur arthakathane prāptās-
padaḥ paddhatu (Wogihara’s edition, 1); dngos dang dngos med rnam dbye'i phyogs la
mkhas par shes pa'i mngon rlom gyis mtho ba / slob dpon dbyig gnyen gyis ni gzhung gi
'grel par don bshad pa la gnas thob gyur (sde dge shes phyin, cha, 2a.2). “The master
Vasubandhu, towering in the pride of a clever knowledge of views about the division of
being and nonbeing, attained a position describing the topics in his Paddhati.” (Here too
the word paddhati is rendered into Tibetan by gzhung gi 'grel pa; the gi and pa are dictated
by meter.)
At the end of the Commentary called “Following the Tradition of Her Ladyship [the
Perfection of Wisdom]” (bhagavatyāmnayānusāriṇī-nāma-vyākhyāna, man ngag rjes
'brang), a little read Indian Perfection of Wisdom commentary by Shi-wa-jung-nay (zhi ba
'byung gnas, *śāntākara), it says (sde dge, shes phyin, ba, 316b.3-6):
Explanations other than that of the Paddhati are not to be accepted. This is be-
cause Superior Maitreyanātha spoke on account of the fact that the master
[Vasubandhu] would explain five hundred sūtras. So how could he
[Vasubandhu] make a wrong explanation? Since [Vasubandhu] explains [in the
opening stanza of his Paddhati] that it is on account of [his] guru's instruction
that “I want to compose clearly a Paddhati that is a 'Conquest Over Objections'
[to the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras]” he thus shelters in the quintessential in-
structions that came from exalted presence, the Superior Asaṅga himself.” (de
bzhin du gzhan la yang gzhung 'grel las log pa'i gzhan rnams kyi bshad pa gzung
bya ma yin pa nyid do // gang gi phyir slob dpon dbyig gnyen mdo sde lnga brgya
bshad pa'i phyir 'phags pa mgon po byams pas bka' stsal pa de bas na / ci ltar
phyin ci log tu bshad pa mdzad, bla ma'i man ngag las gzhung 'grel gnod 'joms
gsal por bya bar 'dod, ces bya ba bshad pa'i 'phags pa thogs med kyi zhal snga
nas nyid kyi man ngag la skyabs su byed do.)
Based on this exchange some Tibetan writers say Vasubandhu wrote this text (the paddhati,
gzhung 'grel). In particular, Dol-po-pa Shay-rab-gyal-tshan privileges this text over Mait-
reya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations as an explanation of the Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtras, and excoriates Haribhadra as a writer in a degenerate age whose works have no
value (see his shes rab kyi phar rol tu phyin pa man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs
pa'i rgyan gyi rnam bshad mdo'i don bde blag tu rtog[s] pa. 'Dzam-Thang Edition of the

46 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Our response: It follows these statements [by someone that this textual
commentary Conquest Over Harm concerning the Three Mothers] is writ-
ten by Vasubandhu and so forth] are not logically feasible, because this
[textual commentary Conquest Over Harm concerning the Three Mothers]
is renowned in earlier old works to be composed by Daṃṣhṭasena. [That
this textual commentary Conquest Over Harm concerning the Three Moth-
ers is renowned in earlier old works to be composed by Daṃṣhṭasena] en-
tails [that these statements by someone that this is written by Vasubandhu,
and so forth] are not logically feasible]; the reason [which is that this tex-
tual commentary Conquest Over Harm concerning the Three Mothers is
renowned in earlier old works to be composed by Daṃṣhṭasena] is estab-
lished because the Phangthang catalogue describes the textual commen-
tary on the three Perfection of Wisdom [Sūtras], Conquest Over Harm, and
translated by the translator Ye-shay-day,a as by Daṃṣhṭasena, and the tex-
tual commentary on only the Hundred Thousand, Conquest Over Harm,
as by [King] Tri-song-de-tsan.b
[ཡུམ་གསུམ་གཞུང་འགྲེལ་གནོད་འཇོམས་]འདི་ཁ་ཅིག་དབྱིག་
གཉེན་གྱིས་མཛད་ཟེར་བ་སོགས་མི་འཐད་པར་ཐལ། [ཡུམ་གསུམ་
གཞུང་འགྲེལ་གནོད་འཇོམས་]འདི་དཾ་ཥྚ་སེ་ནས་མཛད་པར་སྔོན་གྱི་
ཡིག་རྙིང་ལས་གྲགས་པའི་ཕྱིར། [(ཡུམ་གསུམ་གཞུང་འགྲེལ་གནོད་
འཇོམས)འདི་དཾ་ཥྚ་སེ་ནས་མཛད་པར་སྔོན་གྱི་ཡིག་རྙིང་ལས་གྲགས་ན། འདི་ཁ་ཅིག་
Collected Works of Kun-Mkhyen Dol-po-pa Shes-Rab-Rgyal-Mtshan, ed. by Matthew Kap-
stein (Delhi: 1992), vol. 4 (mā), part two, 373). Others like Ar Chang-chub-ye-shay and
Tsong-kha-pa say the author is not Vasubandhu. Ar says, “Some say there is a Paddhati
by master Vasubandhu that connects [Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations]
Treatise with the [Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom in] Eight Chapters. I doubt
anybody exists who has even seen that.” (p. 294 slob dpon dbyig gnyen gyis mdo le'u
brgyad ma dang bstan bcos sbyar ba'i gzhung gi 'grel pa yod zer yang / sus kyang mthong
ba tsam yod pa mi 'dra'o). Citing the different title in the catalogues and other evidence,
Tsong-kha-pa in his Golden Garland (mtsho sngon edition, 5; ACIP edition, tsa, 4b.2;
Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 7) says the author is probably the Kashmiri Daṃṣhṭasena
(kha che sde, daṃṣṭraṣeṇa/daṃṣṭrāsena).
Since in this present book for the UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies the general prin-
ciple is to keep with the literal Tibetan rendering, we are using “textual commentary” to
translate gzhung ’grel.
Ye-shay-day, ye shes sde (fl. 8th century).
Tri-song-de-tsan’s (khri srong sde btsan, 755-804) Extensive Commentary on the One
Hundred Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra (shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa 'bum gyi
rgya cher 'grel pa, śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitābṛhaṭṭīkā; Peking 5205).

Openers of the Chariot-ways 47
དབྱིག་གཉེན་གྱིས་མཛད་ཟེར་བ་སོགས་མི་འཐད་པས་]ཁྱབ་ཅིང་། [ཡུམ་གསུམ་
གཞུང་འགྲེལ་གནོད་འཇོམས་འདི་དཾ་ཥྚ་སེ་ནས་མཛད་པར་སྔོན་གྱི་ཡིག་རྙིང་ལས་
གྲགས་པའི་]རྟགས་[6a]གྲུབ་སྟེ་ཡུམ་གསུམ་གཞུང་འགྲེལ་གནོད་
འཇོམས་ལོ་ཙྪ་བ་ཡེ་ཤེས་སྡེས་བསྒྱུར་བ་དེ་མཆེ་བའི་སྡེས་མཛད་
ལ། འབུམ་རྐྱང་པའི་གཞུང་འགྲེལ་གནོད་འཇོམས་དེ་ཁྲི་སྲོང་ལྡེ་
བཙན་གྱིས་མཛད་པར་དཀར་ཆག་འཕང་ཐང་མར་བཤད་པའི་
The fourth [which is that the way the Ornament for the Clear Realiza-
tions comments on the thought of those Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras in
the manner of eight categories] exists because the Foremost Holy Maitreya
explains the corpus of the long, middling, and short Mothers [Perfection
of Wisdom Sūtras] in nine or five cycles as eight categories and seventy
topics, because Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:a
The Victor Ajita composed the Ornament for the Clear Realiza-
tions systematizing the contents of the Mothers as the eight clear
realizations and seventy topics, and connecting them with the
stages in yogic practice.
I will explain whether these [four—Nāgārjuna’s Collections of Reason-
ings, Dignāga’s Summary of the “Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtra, Daṃṣhṭasena's Conquest Over Harm, and the Foremost Holy Mait-
reya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations] are or are not openers of char-
iot-ways below [on the occasion of (examining) the statements by earlier
Tibetans that “The openers of the chariot-ways who did not rely on other
commentators are limited to Nāgārjuna, Dignāga, Vasubandhu, and the
Foremost Holy Maitreya” and so forth (see below, 84)].
བཞི་པ་[མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་གྱིས་དངོས་པོ་བརྒྱད་དུ་བཀྲལ་ཚུལ་]ཡོད་དེ། རྗེ་
བཙུན་བྱམས་པས་རྒྱས་འབྲིང་བསྡུས་པ་སྐོར་དགུའམ་ལྔའི་དོན་
ཡུམ་གྱི་ལུས་དངོས་བརྒྱད་དོན་བདུན་ཅུར་བཀྲལ་བའི་ཕྱིར།
mtsho sngon edition,7, ACIP edition tsa, 5b.4-5; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 9.

48 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། རྒྱལ་བ་མི་ཕམ་པས་ཡུམ་གྱི་ལུས་དངོས་
བརྒྱད་དོན་བདུན་ཅུར་དྲིལ་ཏེ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་པས་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་
པའི་རིམ་པ་དང་སྦྱར་ནས་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པའི་རྒྱན་མཛད་
དོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། [ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རིགས་ཚོགས་དང་། ཕྱོགས་གླང་གི་
བརྒྱད་སྟོང་དོན་བསྡུས་དང་། ཁ་ཆེ་མཆེ་བའི་སྡེའི་གནོད་འཇོམས་དང་། རྗེ་བཙུན་གྱི་
མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་དང་བཞི་པོ་]དེ་དག་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་མིན་
འོག་ཏུ་[སྔོན་གྱི་བོད་དག་ན་རེ། འགྲེལ་བྱེད་གཞན་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་
འབྱེད་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཕྱོགས་གླང་དབྱིག་གཉེན་རྗེ་བཙུན་བྱམས་པ་བཞིར་ངེས་ཟེར་ན། ཞེས་
སོགས་ཀྱི་སྐབས་སུ་]འཆད་དོ། །
Hence, there are twenty-one Indian commentaries on the Ornament
for the Clear Realizations because there are twelve that correlate it with
[specific] sūtras and nine that do not. The first [which is that there are
twelve that correlate the Ornament for the Clear Realizations with specific
sūtras] is established because there are the twelve consisting of:
FOUR [THAT CONNECT THE ORNAMENT WITH THE EIGHT HUNDRED THOU-
SAND]
1. Āryavimuktisena’s Commentary on the Twenty-five Thousand,a
2. Bhadanta Vimuktisena’s Subcommentary on the Twenty-five Thou-
sand,
3. the Master [Haribhadra’s] commentary [called] the Twenty-five Thou-
sand in Eight Chapters,b and
Āryavimuktisena’s Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions
on the ‘Superior Twenty-Five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra’: Ornament for the
Clear Realizations” (cited hereafter as Āryavimuktisena's Commentary),
(pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñopadeśaśāstrābhisamayālaṃkāravṛtti, 'phags pa shes rab kyi
pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs
pa'i rgyan gyi 'grel pa; abbr. nyi 'khri snang ba). Page numbers of the Sanskrit for the first
abhisamaya follow the edition of Corrado Pensa (L’Abhisamayālaṃkāravṛtti di Ārya-
vimuktisena, Rome: Is.M.E.O, 1967); for the remaining abhisamayas they follow the San-
skrit manuscript (Nepal-German Ms. Preservation Project, Reel no. A37/9). English trans-
lation by Gareth Sparham, Abhisamayālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā, vols. 1-4 (Fremont,
Calif.: Jain Publishing Company, 2006-2011). The common Tibetan abbreviation for this
work is nyi snang.
Haribhadra’s Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra in Eight Chapters /

Openers of the Chariot-ways 49
4. Ratnākarashānti’s Purity commentary on the Twenty-five Thousand;a
ONE THAT CONNECTS THE ORNAMENT WITH THE ONE HUNDRED THOU-
SAND
5. the commentary widely attributed to Dharmashrī from Kashmir;b
THREE THAT CONNECT THE ORNAMENT WITH THE BRIEF [EIGHT THOU-
SAND]
6. the Master Haribhadra’s long Illumination commentary on the Eight
Thousand,c
7. Ratnākara’s Quintessence,d
8. Abhayākara’s Moonlight;e
THREE THAT CONNECT THE ORNAMENT WITH THE STANZA SUMMARYf
9. Haribhadra’s Easy Pañjikā,g
10. Buddhajñāna’s Stanza Summary Pañjikā,h and
Twenty-five Thousand in Eight Chapters / Eight Chapters
(pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi
shu lnga pa / le'u brgyad ma).
Ratnākarashānti’s Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”:
Purity (abhisamayālaṃkārakārikāvṛittiśuddhamatīnāma, mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi
'grel pa'i tshig le'ur byas pa'i 'grel pa dag ldan).
Dharmashrī’s Explanation of the “One Hundred Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”
(śatasāhasrikāvivaraṇa, stong phrag brgya pa'i rnam par bshad pa).
Haribhadra’s Explanation of the “Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”: Illumi-
nation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”
(aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāvyākhyānābhisamayālaṃkārālokā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu
phyin pa brgyad stong pa'i bshad pa mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi snang ba). English
translation by Gareth Sparham, Abhisamayālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā, vols. 1-4
(Fremont, Calif.: Jain Publishing Company, 2006-2011).
Ratnākarashānti's Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Eight Thousand Perfection
of Wisdom Sūtra”: Quintessence (ārya-aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā-pañjikāsārottamā,
phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa'i dka' 'grel snying po mchog).
Abhayākaragupta’s Commentary on the “Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”:
Moonlight of Essential Points (aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāvṛtti-marmakaumudī, shes
rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa'i 'grel pa gnad kyi zla ba'i 'od).
Stanza Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom (prajñāpāramitāsañcayagāthā, shes rab kyi
pha rol tu phyin pa sdud pa tshigs su bcad pa).
g
Haribhadra’s Commentary that Makes the Difficult Points of the “Stanza Summary of the
Precious Qualities of the Supramundane Victorious [Mother]” Easy to Understand (bha-
gavatīratnaguṇasaṃcayagāthāpañjikāsubodhinīnāma, bcom ldan 'das yon tan rin po che
sdus pa'i tshig su bcad pa'i dka' 'grel).
h
Buddhajñāna’s Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Stanza Summary” (sañcaya-
gāthāpañjikā, bsdus pa tshig su bcad pa'i dka' 'grel).

50 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
11. Dharmashrī from Kashmir’s Key to the Treasury;a
[ONE THAT CONNECTS THE ORNAMENT WITH] THE ONE HUNDRED THOU-
SAND, TWENTY-FIVE THOUSAND, AND EIGHTEEN THOUSAND PERFECTION
OF WISDOM SŪTRAS
12. the Teaching Through Eight Concordant Meaningsb widely attributed
to Smṛtijñānakīrti.
For, Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:c
With respect to commentaries following this Ornament there are
twelve that correlate it with [specific] sūtras.
དེས་ན་མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་ལ་རྒྱ་འགྲེལ་ཉེར་གཅིག་ཡོད་དེ། མདོ་
དང་སྦྱར་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས་མ་སྦྱར་བ་དགུ་ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱིར། དང་པོ་
[མདོ་དང་སྦྱར་བ་བཅུ་གཉིས་ཡོད་པར]གྲུབ་སྟེ། འཕགས་པས་ཉི་ཁྲི་སྣང་
བ་དང་། བཙུན་པས་ཉི་ཁྲི་རྣམ་འགྲེལ་དང་། སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་ཉི་
ཁྲི་ལེ་བརྒྱད་མ། ཤནྟི་པས་ཉི་ཁྲི་དག་ལྡན་བཞི་དང་། ཁ་ཆེ་དྷརྨ་
ཤྲིས་མཛད་པར་གྲགས་པའི་འབུམ་ཊཱིཀ་སྟེ་འབུམ་དང་སྦྱར་བ་
གཅིག་དང་། སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་འགྲེལ་ཆེན་དང་། སྙིང་
པོ་མཆོག་དང་། གནད་ཀྱི་ཟླ་འོད་དེ་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པར་སྦྱར་བ་
གསུམ་དང་། སྡུད་པའི་དཀའ་འགྲེལ་རྟོགས་སླ་དང་། སྡུད་པའི་
དཀའ་འགྲེལ་དང་། ཤེར་ཕྱིན་མཛོད་ཀྱི་ལྡེ་མིག་སྟེ་སྡུད་པ་དང་
སྦྱར་བ་གསུམ་དང་། སྨྲི་ཏིས་མཛད་པར་གྲགས་པའི་འབུམ་ཉི་ཁྲི་
Dharmashrī’s Key to the Treasury of the Perfection of Wisdom (prajñāpāramitākośatalā,
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i mdzod kyi lde mig).
Smṛtijñānakīrti’s Indicating Through Eight Concordant Meanings the Mother Perfection
of Wisdom Taught Extensively in One Hundred Thousand, Taught in Medium Length in
Twenty-five Thousand, and Taught in Brief in Eight Thousand (prajñāpāramitāmātṛikā-
śatasāhasrikābṛhacchāsanapañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāmadh-
yaśāsanāṣṭādaśasāhasrikālaghuśāsanāṣṭasamānārthaśāsana, yum shes rab kyi pha rol tu
phyin pa brgyas par bstan pa 'bum dang 'bring du bstan pa nyi khri lnga stong dang bsdus
te bstan pa khri brgyad stong pa rnams mthun par don brgyad kyis bstan pa).
mtsho sngon edition, 9; ACIP edition, tsa, 6b.5; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 11.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 51
ཁྲི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པ་གསུམ་གྱི་དོན་བརྒྱད་ཀྱིས་མཐུན་པར་བསྟན་
[6b]
པ་དང་བཅུ་གཉིས་ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱིར། གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། རྒྱན་
འདིའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་པའི་འགྲེལ་པ་ལ་ཡང་མདོ་དང་སྦྱར་བ་
བཅུ་གཉིས། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The second [which is that there are nine that do not correlate the Ornament
for the Clear Realizations with specific sūtras] is established because there
are nine consisting of:
1. Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary [that reveals the topics],
2. and its [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary’s] two subcom-
mentaries––Dharmamitra's Clear Words and
3. Serlingpa’s Illumination of the Difficult to Realize,a
4. and its [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary’s] Summary by
Prajñākaramati;b
5. the two Summaries of the root text [Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear
Realizations] by the Elder [Atisha]c
6. and Kumārashrī;d
7. Ratnakīrti’s Ratnakīrti’s Commentary,e
8. Buddhajñāna’s Wisdom Lamp Garland Commentary,f
Dharmakīrtishrī (chos kyi grags pa dpal / gser gling pa, fl. c. 1000), Explanation of
(Haribhadra’s) “Commentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on
the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Realizations’”: Illumination of the Dif-
ficult to Realize (prajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstrābhisamayālaṃkāravṛttidurbodhālokā-
nāmaṭīkā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i
rgyan gyi 'grel pa rtogs par dka' ba'i snang ba zhes bya ba'i 'grel bshad).
Prajñākaramati (shes rab 'byung gnas blo gros, 950-1030), Summary of (Haribhadra’s)
“Commentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Ornament for the Clear Realizations’” (abhisamayālaṃ-
kāravṛittipiṇḍārtha, mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi 'grel pa'i bsdus don).
Atisha, Lamp Summary of (Maitreya’s) “Perfection of Wisdom” (prajñāpāramitā-
piṇḍārthapradīpa, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i don bsdus sgron ma).
Kumārashrībhadra, Summary of (Maitreya’s) “Perfection of Wisdom” (prajñāpāramitā-
piṇḍārtha, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i don bsdus pa).
Ratnakīrti, Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”: A Por-
tion of Glory (abhisamayālaṃkāravṛittikīrtikalānāma, mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi 'grel
pa grags pa'i cha).
Buddhajñāna, Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on
the Supramundane Victorious Mother Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Re-
alizations”: Wisdom Lamp Garland (abhisamayālaṃkārabhagavatī-prajñāpāramitopa-
deśaśāstravṛttiprajñāpradīpāvali, bcom ldan ’das ma shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i

52 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
9. and Abhayākara’s Ornament for the Thought of the Sage.a
གཉིས་པ་[མ་སྦྱར་བ་དགུ་ཡོད་པར་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་
དང་། [འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་]དེའི་འགྲེལ་བཤད་ཚིག་གསལ་དང་།
རྟོགས་དཀའི་སྣང་བ་གཉིས་དང་། [འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་]དེའི་བསྡུས་
དོན་ཤེར་འབྱུང་གིས་མཛད་པ་དང་། རྩ་བའི་བསྡུས་དོན་ཇོ་བོས་
མཛད་པ་དང་། གཞོན་ནུ་དཔལ་གྱིས་མཛད་པ་གཉིས་དང་།
གྲགས་ཆ་དང་། ཤེར་སྒྲོན་དང་། ཐུབ་དགོངས་ཏེ་དགུ་ཡོད་པའི་
As Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:b
There are twenty-one commentaries…and nine that do not.
“Widely attributed” [means] there is doubt [as to the attribution].c
གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། མ་སྦྱར་བ་དགུ་སྟེ་ཉེར་གཅིག་གོ །ཞེས་
གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། གྲགས་ཞེས་པ་ཐེ་ཚོམ་ཅན་ནོ། །
The second root reason10 which are the modes of commenting on the
explicit and the hidden meanings] exist because:
1. in accordance with the Teachings of Akṣhayamati Sūtra the glorious
Nāgārjuna differentiates the definitive and the interpretable of the
Middle Way system through his Collections of Reasoning, and the
Victor Maitreya also explains it similarly in his Treatise on the Later
Scriptures of the Great Vehicled and Ornament for the Clear Realiza-
tions, which Asaṅga also explains in his Explanation of (Maitreya’s)
man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi ’grel pa shes rab sgron ma’i
phreng ba).
Abhayākaragupta, Ornament for the Thought of the Sage (munimatālaṃkāra, thub pa'i
dgongs pa'i rgyan).
mtsho sngon edition, 9; ACIP edition, tsa, 6b.5; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 11.
“Widely attributed” appears in numbers five and twelve in the first group above, and
refers by extension to their source in Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland (mtsho sngon edition,
9; ACIP edition, tsa, 7a.3; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 11).
Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle, or Great Vehicle Trea-
tise on the Sublime Continuum (mahāyānottaratantraśāstra, theg pa chen po rgyud bla

Openers of the Chariot-ways 53
“Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle;”a
2. and in accordance with the meaning of the Sūtra Unraveling the
Thoughtb the Foremost Holy Maitreya differentiates the interpretable
and the definitive in his Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras, Dif-
ferentiation of the Middle and the Extremes, and Differentiation of
Phenomena and Noumenon, c and [Asaṅga’s] Five Treatises on the
Grounds and Two Summaries do it following those, [that is, Mait-
reya’s Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras, Differentiation of the
Middle and the Extremes, and Differentiation of Phenomena and Nou-
menon].d
ma’i bstan bcos).
Asaṅga’s Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Ve-
hicle” (mahāyānottaratantraśāstravyākhyā, theg pa chen po’i rgyud bla ma’i bstan bcos
kyi rnam par bshad pa).
Sūtra Unraveling the Thought (saṃdhinirmocanasūtra, dgongs pa nges par ’grel pa’i
mdo).
Maitreya’s Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras (mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, theg pa chen
po’i mdo sde rgyan gyi tshig le’ur byas pa); Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes
(madhyāntavibhāgakārikā, dbu dang mtha' rnam par 'byed pa tshigs su byas pa); and Dif-
ferentiation of Phenomena and Noumenon (dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga, chos dang chos
nyid rnam par ’byed pa).
“Five Treatises on the Grounds” renders sa sde lnga, that is, the subdivision of Asaṅga’s
Grounds of Yogic Practice (yogācārabhūmi, rnal 'byor spyod pa'i sa) into five sections.
Jeffrey Hopkins in the bibliography of Maps of the Profound (Ithaca: Snow Lion Publica-
tions, 1060-1061) gives the usual list:
1. Actuality of the Grounds, bhūmivastu, sa’i dngos gzhi
2. Compendium of Ascertainments, viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī, rnam par gtan la dbab pa
bsdu ba
3. Compendium of Bases, vastusaṃgraha, gzhi bsdu ba
4. Compendium of Enumerations, paryāyasaṃgraha, rnam grang bsdu ba
5. Compendium of Explanations, vyākhyāmukhasaṃgraha / vivaraṇasaṃgraha, rnam
par bshad pa bsdu ba.
He lists the Two Summaries (sdom rnam gnyis) as
1. Summary of Manifest Knowledge, abhidharmasamuccaya, chos mngon pa kun btus
2. Summary of the Great Vehicle, mahāyānasaṃgraha, theg pa chen po bsdus pa.
According to Situ Paṇchen’s introduction to the De-ge (sde dge) edition of the Translation
of the Treatises (bstan 'gyur) (folios 150-151), there are seven works of Asaṅga. Of the
seven, the sa sde lnga (“set of five grounds”) are the root. Amongst them, the sa’i dngos
gzhi (“fundamental ground”) “teaches the way to enlightenment for a single person by
summarizing the conditions under seventeen grounds.” What are the seventeen? The first
two grounds are from the perspective of the basis for the practice––the continuum of the
collection of eight consciousnesses. The 3rd to 5th grounds are the bare fundamental stage
of the first concentration, when it is special, and from the second concentration on up.

54 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
རྩ་བའི་རྟགས་གཉིས་པ་དངོས་བསྟན་དང་སྦས་དོན་བཀྲལ་ཚུལ་
ཡོད་དེ། བློ་གྲོས་མི་ཟད་པའི་མདོ་ལྟར་དུ་དཔལ་མགོན་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་
ཀྱིས་རིགས་ཚོགས་ཀྱིས་དབུ་མའི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དྲང་ངེས་མཛད་པ་
དང་། དེ་བཞིན་དུ་རྒྱལ་བ་བྱམས་པས་ཀྱང་རྒྱུད་བླ་མ་དང་
མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་དུ་བཤད་པ་རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་འགྲེལ་པར་ཐོགས་
མེད་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་བཤད་པ་གང་ཞིག་དགོངས་འགྲེལ་གྱི་དོན་བཞིན་
རྗེ་བཙུན་བྱམས་པས་མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན་འབྱེད་གཉིས་སུ་དྲང་ངེས་
མཛད་ལ། [མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན་དང་འབྱེད་གཉིས་པོ་]དེའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ཏེ་ས་
སྡེ་ལྔ་དང་སྡོམ་གཉིས་མཛད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
Taken at different times (gnas skabs) there are four grounds within those: with meditative
stabilization in the Form and Formless realms, without meditative stabilization in the De-
sire Realm, without mind (when absorbed in the cessation of discrimination and feeling,
and absorbed in cessation), and with mind (otherwise).
The last eight are the three all-inclusive grounds: the hearing, thinking, and meditation
grounds when the basis is taken in a series; the three Hearers, Solitary Realizers, and Bo-
dhisattva grounds (because there are just the three vehicles) when taken from the perspec-
tive of the results you get to; and the last two grounds that are the results of the three
vehicles.
The second of the seven works of Asaṅga (and second of the five in the set of five
levels) is the Compendium of Ascertainments. It is like a commentary on the sa’i dgnos
gzhi and in particular ascertains that the defilement and purification sides are the basic topic
that it has to talk about.
The third, the Compendium of Bases shows how the sa’i dngos gzhi (“fundamental
ground”) brings together in itself the three scriptural collections. In its opening précis it
brings together the three scriptural collections, but in its detailed section only the Vinaya
and Sūtra scriptural collections.
The fourth, the Compendium of Enumerations ascertains the presence of many spe-
cific synonymous passages about defilement and purification.
And the fifth, the Compendium of Explanations teaches the subject matter, the lan-
guage a buddha uses when speaking, and how it functions as teaching.
Of the two summaries (making up the sixth and seventh of the seven works of Asaṅga)
the Summary of Manifest Knowledge brings together its subject matter under five headings:
definitions, ascertaining the truths, ascertaining the dharmas, ascertaining the attainments,
and ascertaining the discourses, and teaches tenets shared by the Hearers and Yogācāra
such as the production, lasting, and perishing of dharmas, as well as tenets like the eight
consciousnesses and three natures.
The other is the Summary of the Great Vehicle.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 55
The first [which is that in accordance with the Teachings of Akṣhayamati
Sūtra the glorious Nāgārjuna differentiates the interpretable and the defin-
itive of the Middle Way system through his Collections of Reasoning, and
the Victor Maitreya also explains it similarly in his Treatise on the Later
Scriptures of the Great Vehicle and Ornament for the Clear Realizations,
which Asaṅga also explains in his Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Treatise
on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle] is established because Gyal-
tshab's Ornament for the Essence says:a
Following the former Sūtra, the protector Nāgārjuna differentiates
between interpretable and definitive,
and:
In Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle
it is explained that the extensive, medium-length, and condensed
Mother [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras] and the Matrix of the One-
Gone-Thus Sūtrab clearly teach without difference that the object
of observation of the path is the emptiness of true existence of all
phenomena, the ultimate truth free from all proliferations that:
is to be taught at a later time to those whose continuums have
been ripened through familiarization with the system of Cog-
nition-Only
and is to be taught right from the first to those in the Great
Gyal-tshab’s Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations” and
(Haribhadra’s) Commentary: Ornament for the Essence (shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i
man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi rtsa ba 'grel pa dang bcas pa'i
rnam bshad snying po'i rgyan); hereafter cited as Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence
(rnam bshad snying po rgyan), kha, 3b.1, and 4a.3-4b.1; Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only parts
of the first and last lines of the second passage; I have provided the entire citation.
theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma'i bstan bcos las ni rnam par rig pa tsam gyi tshul
la goms pas rgyud smin par byas pa rnams la yang dus phyis bstan par bya zhing
/ theg pa chen po'i rigs can dbang po mchog tu gyur pa rnams la dang po nyid
nas bstan par bya ba nyan thos kyi byang chub dang / rang sangs rgyas kyi byang
chub thob pa la yang nges par rtogs dgos pa'i lam gyi dmigs pa chos thams cad
bden pas stong pa don dam pa'i bden pa spros pa thams cad dang bral ba mdo
rgyas 'bring bsdus gsum dang / de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying po'i mdos khyad par
med par gsal bar ston par 'chad la/ de nyid slob dpon thogs med kyis/ de'i 'grel
par/ dgongs pa ji lta ba bzhin du gsal bar mdzad pas drang nges 'byed tshul dang
po la ltos pa'i shing rta'i srol 'byed mgon po klu sgrub las log su bsam par mi
bya ste/ de nyid kyi rjes su 'brang ba'i phyir ro
Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sūtra (tathāgatagarbhasūtra, de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying
po'i mdo).

56 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Vehicle lineage who have the supreme faculties
and definitely must be realized even to attain Hearer enlight-
enment and Solitary Realizer enlightenment.
Since the master Asaṅga in commentary on thata made clarifica-
tion exactly in accordance with [Maitreya’s] thought, you should
not think that he differs from the protector Nāgārjuna, the opener
of the chariot-way relative to the first differentiation of the inter-
pretable and definitive, because he is following just him [Nāgār-
juna].
དང་པོ་[བློ་གྲོས་མི་ཟད་པའི་མདོ་ལྟར་དུ་དཔལ་མགོན་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱིས་རིགས་ཚོགས་
ཀྱིས་དབུ་མའི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་དྲང་ངེས་མཛད་པར་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། རྣམ་བཤད་ལས།
མདོ་སྔ་མའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་མགོན་པོ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱིས་དྲང་
དོན་དང་ངེས་དོན་འབྱེད་པའི། ཞེས་དང་། ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་
རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི། ཞེས་པ་ནས། [བསྟན་བཅོས་ལས་ནི་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་ཙམ་གྱི་
ཚུལ་ལ་གོམས་པས་རྒྱུད་སྨིན་པར་བྱས་པ་རྣམས་ལ་ཡང་དུས་ཕྱིས་བསྟན་པར་བྱ་ཞིང་།
ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་རིགས་ཅན་དབང་པོ་མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ་རྣམས་ལ་དང་པོ་ཉིད་ནས་
བསྟན་པར་བྱ་བ་ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ་དང་། རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐོབ་པ་ལ་
ཡང་ངེས་པར་རྟོགས་དགོས་པའི་ལམ་གྱི་དམིགས་པ་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་བདེན་པས་སྟོང་
པ་དོན་དམ་པའི་བདེན་པ་སྤྲོས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་བྲལ་བ་མདོ་རྒྱས་འབྲིང་བསྡུས་
གསུམ་དང་། དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོའི་མདོས་ཁྱད་པར་མེད་པར་གསལ་བར་
སྟོན་པར་འཆད་ལ། དེ་ཉིད་སློབ་དཔོན་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱིས། དེའི་འགྲེལ་པར། དགོངས་པ་
ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་དུ་གསལ་བར་མཛད་པས་དྲང་ངེས་འབྱེད་ཚུལ་དང་པོ་ལ་ལྟོས་པའི་
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མགོན་པོ་]ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་ལོགས་སུ་བསམ་པར་མི་བྱ་
སྟེ་དེ་ཉིད་ ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་
[7a]
The second [which is that in accordance with the meaning of the Sūtra
Asaṅga’s Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Ve-
hicle (mahāyānottaratantraśāstravyākhyā, theg pa chen po’i rgyud bla ma’i bstan bcos kyi
rnam par bshad pa).

Openers of the Chariot-ways 57
Unraveling the Thought, the Foremost Holy Maitreya differentiates the in-
terpretable and the definitive in his Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras,
Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes, and Differentiation of Phe-
nomena and Noumenon,a and (Asaṅga’s) Five Treatises on the Grounds
and Two Summaries do it following those] is established because Gyal-
tshab’s Ornament for the Essence says:b
Following these three treatises, [the Ornament for the Great Vehi-
cle Sūtras and the two Differentiations,] and in accordance with
the way the Sūtra Unraveling the Thought differentiates the inter-
pretable and definitive, the Master [Asaṅga] in his Five Treatises
on the Grounds, c two Summaries, d and so on opened well the
chariot-way of Cognition-Only.
གཉིས་པ་[མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན་དང་འབྱེད་གཉིས་པོ་དེའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ཏེ་ས་སྡེ་ལྔ་དང་
སྡོམ་གཉིས་མཛད་པར་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། རྣམ་བཤད་ལས། བསྟན་བཅོས་གསུམ་
པོ་དེ་དག་གི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་མདོ་སྡེ་དགོངས་འགྲེལ་དུ་
དྲང་ངེས་འབྱེད་པའི་ཚུལ་དང་མཐུན་པར་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་ས་སྡེ་
ལྔ་སྡོམ་རྣམ་གཉིས་ལ་སོགས་པར་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་ཙམ་གྱི་ཤིང་
རྟའི་སྲོལ་ལེགས་པར་ཕྱེ་ཞིང་། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
Maitreya’s Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras (mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, theg pa chen
po’i mdo sde rgyan gyi tshig le’ur byas pa); Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes
(madhyāntavibhāgakārikā, dbu dang mtha' rnam par 'byed pa tshigs su byas pa); and Dif-
ferentiation of Phenomena and Noumenon (dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga, chos dang chos
nyid rnam par ’byed pa).
kha, 4a.1-2.
The Five Treatises on the Grounds are:
1. Grounds of Yogic Practice (yogācārabhūmi, rnal ’byor spyod pa’i sa)
2. Compendium of Ascertainments (nirṇayasaṃgraha / viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī, rnam
par gtan la dbab pa bsdu ba)
3. Compendium of Bases (vastusaṃgraha, gzhi bsdu ba)
4. Compendium of Enumerations (paryāyasaṃgraha, rnam grang bsdu ba)
5. Compendium of Explanations (vivaraṇasaṃgraha, rnam par bshad pa bsdu ba)
The Two Summaries are:
1. Summary of Manifest Knowledge (abhidharmasamuccaya, chos mngon pa kun btus)
2. Summary of the Great Vehicle (mahāyānasaṃgraha, theg pa chen po bsdus pa)

58 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Thus, [my] explanation of the Master [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning] Com-
mentary in line with:
most of the twenty-one commentaries of the Country of Superiors [In-
dia],
and primarily the two Illuminations a by Āryavimuktisena and by
Haribhadra,
and the Foremost Precious [Tsong-kha-pa’s] Golden Garland,
and the Ornament of the Essence which is quintessential instructions
about how to put the topics into practice in detail that Tsong-kha-pa
bestowed on the Precious Gyal-tshab at Ra-dreng,b when at a later
time Tsong-kha-pa studied the Perfection of Wisdom with the Fore-
most Holy [Mañjushrī], and Gyal-tshab took them down as notes
has three parts: the meaning of the title, the meaning of the text, and the
meaning of the conclusion.
དེ་ལྟར་འཕགས་ཡུལ་གྱི་འགྲེལ་པ་ཉེར་གཅིག་གི་ཕལ་ཆེར་དང་།
གཙོ་བོར་འཕགས་སེང་གི་སྣང་བ་གཉིས་དང་། རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེའི་
ལེགས་བཤད་གསེར་གྱི་འཕྲེང་བ་དང་། དུས་ཕྱིས་རྗེ་བཙུན་ལ་
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསན་ནས་དོན་ཞིབ་པར་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་ཚུལ་དང་
བཅས་པའི་མན་ངག་རྒྱལ་ཚབ་རིན་བོ་ཆེ་ལ་རྭ་སྒྲེང་དུ་སྩལ་ཏེ།
དེའི་ཟིན་བྲིས་སུ་མཛད་པའི་རྣམ་བཤད་སྙིང་པོའི་རྒྱན་གྱི་དོན་
བཞིན་དུ་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་པ་འཆད་པ་ལ། མཚན་གྱི་དོན།
གཞུང་གི་དོན། མཇུག་གི་དོན་གསུམ་ལས།
I. MEANING OF THE TITLE
དང་པོ་[མཚན་གྱི་དོན་]ལ་
The “two Illuminations” (snang ba gnyis) are nyi snang and rgyan snang, standard ab-
breviations for Āryavimuktisena's Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessen-
tial Instructions on the ‘Superior Twenty-Five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtra’: Ornament for the Clear Realizations” and Haribhadra’s Explanation of the “Eight
Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”: Illumination of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament
for the Clear Realizations,”
rwa sgreng.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 59
This has two parts: title and translators’ homage.
མཚན་དོན་དང་འགྱུར་ཕྱག་གཉིས་ལས།
A. TITLE
དང་པོ་[མཚན་གྱི་དོན་]ནི།
This is:a
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instruc-
tions on the Perfection of Wisdom Called Ornament for the Clear
Realizations”
རྒྱ་གར་སྐད་དུ། ནས།[ཨ་བྷི་ས་མ་ཡྰ་ལཾ་ཀྰ་ར་ནྰ་མ་པྲཛ་ྙྰ པྰ་ར་མི་ཏཽ་པ་དེ་ཤ་
ཤྰས་ྟྲ ]བྲྀཏ྄་ཏིའི་བར་བྱུང་།
B. TRANSLATORS’ HOMAGE
གཉིས་པ་[འགྱུར་ཕྱག་]ལ་
This has two parts: the number of the set of pages and the translators’ hom-
age.
གཉིས་པ་[འགྱུར་ཕྱག་]ལ་བམ་གྲངས་དང་། འགྱུར་ཕྱག་གཉིས།
1. The number of the set of pages
དང་པོ་[བམ་གྲངས་]ནི།
This is:
Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the beginning and end of the passage. This renders the Ti-
betan title shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i
rgyan shes bya ba’i ’grel pa (sde dge sher phyin, ja, 78bff.), which is based on Haribhadra’s
title, Elucidation of the Stanza Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of
Wisdom Called Ornament for the Clear Realizations (abhisamayālaṃkārakārikāśāstra-
vivṛti) as found in Koei H. Amano, Abhisamayālaṃkāra-kārikā-śāstra-vivṛti. Haribha-
dra’s Commentary on the Abhisamayālaṃkārakārikā-śāstra edited for the first time from
a Sanskrit Manuscript (Kyoto: Heirakuji-Shoten. 2000). Hereafter this is cited as
Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary, based on the short Tibetan title ’grel pa don
gsal.

60 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
The first set of pages.a
བམ་པོ་དང་པོ་ཞེས་བྱུང་།
2. The translators’ homage
གཉིས་པ་[འགྱུར་ཕྱག་]ནི།
This is:
Homage to all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas.
These are easy [to understand].
སངས་རྒྱས་དང་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་ཕྱག་
འཚལ་ལོ། །ཞེས་བྱུང་བ་དག་སླ།
II. MEANING OF THE TEXT
གཉིས་པ་གཞུང་དོན་ལ་
This has three parts: the way the explanation is introduced, the way the
actual explanation is arrayed, and the way the explanation is brought to its
conclusion.
བཤད་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་དང་། བཤད་པ་ཉིད་འགོད་པ་དང་།
བཤད་པ་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཚུལ་གསུམ།
A. THE WAY THE EXPLANATION IS INTRODUCED
དང་པོ་[བཤད་པ་ལ་འཇུག་པ་]ལ།
This has three parts: expression of worship and commitment to give an
explanation, establishing it is reasonable to compose the commentary, and
the reason for humility and generating enthusiasm.
The notation bam po dang po (“the first set of pages” which is equal to about 300 lines
of an original text) is inserted into Haribhadra’s text here by the Tibetan translators, as is
their homage.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 61
མཆོད་པར་བརྗོད་ཅིང་བཤད་པར་དམ་བཅའ་བ་དང་། འགྲེལ་
པ་ རྩོམ་རིགས་པར་བསྒྲུབ་པ་དང་། ཁེངས་སྐྱུངས་ཤིང་སྤྲོ་བ་སྐྱེ་
[7b]
བའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན་གསུམ།
1. Expression of worship and commitment to
give an explanation
དང་པོ་[མཆོད་པར་བརྗོད་ཅིང་བཤད་པར་དམ་བཅའ་བ་]ནི།
[Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary says:]
Respectful homage to the perfection of wisdom
In order to open up
The Versified Ornament of those
As an ornament for all.
ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལ། ། ཞེས་སོགས་[དེའི་རྒྱན་ཚིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ་
དག །ཀུན་གྱི་རྒྱན་དུ་འགྱུར་བར་ནི། །རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་ཕྱིར་གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ། །]བྱུང་།
This has two parts, syllogism and decisive analysis.
འདི་ལ་སྦྱོར་བ་དང་། མཐའ་དཔྱད་པ་གཉིས།
a. Syllogism
The subject, the master Haribhadra,a makes praise and homage to all three
perfections of wisdom—text, path, and result—because while expressing
the good qualities of the three perfections of wisdom he bows the three
doors [of his body, speech, and mind], because Haribhadra’s Clear Mean-
ing Commentary says:
Respectful homage to the perfection of wisdom.
and because with “perfection of wisdom” he praises by way expressing
good qualities, and bowing is homage.
Both the 2011 TBRC bla brang (7b.1) and the 2015 Lhasa Go-mang (5a.7) misread ha ri
bhā tra.

62 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
དང་པོ་[སྦྱོར་བ་]ནི། སློབ་དཔོན་ཧ་རི་བྷཱ་ཏྲ་ཆོས་ཅན། ཁྱོད་ཀྱིས་
གཞུང་ལམ་འབྲས་བུ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་ལ་བསྟོད་ཕྱག་མཛད་པ་
ཡིན་ཏེ། དེ་གསུམ་གྱི་ཕར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྗོད་ཅིང་སྒོ་གསུམ་
འདུད་པར་མཛད་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་པར། ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་
པ་ལ། །གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། ཤེར་ཕྱིན་
ཞེས་པས་ཡོན་ཏན་བརྗོད་པས་བསྟོད་ཅིང་། འདུད་པ་ཕྱག་ཡིན་
པའི་ཕྱིར།
There is a purpose in his making praise and homage, because it is in order
to:
accomplish the two aims of oneself and others11
pacify impediments
and comment on the Ornament of the Mothers, that is, [Maitreya’s]
Versified Ornament for the Clear Realizations, in the manner of an
ornament that highlights all three—the extensive, middle-length, and
condensed Mothers [that is, the One Hundred Thousand, Twenty-five
Thousand, and Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras], because
Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary says:
In order to open up
The Versified Ornament of those
As an ornament for all.
བསྟོད་ཕྱག་མཛད་པ་ལ་དགོས་པ་ཡོད་དེ། རང་གཞན་གྱི་དོན་
གཉིས་འགྲུབ་ཅིང་བར་ཆད་ཞི་བ་དང་། ཡུམ་གྱི་རྒྱན་ཏེ་མངོན་
རྟོགས་རྒྱན་གྱི་ཚིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ་ཡུམ་རྒྱས་འབྲིང་བསྡུས་གསུམ་
ཀུན་གྱི་གསལ་བྱེད་ཀྱི་རྒྱན་དུ་འགྲེལ་པའི་ཆེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར།
འགྲེལ་པར། [ཡུམ་]དེའི་རྒྱན་ཚིག་ལེའུར་བྱས་པ་དག །ཀུན་གྱི་
རྒྱན་དུ་འགྱུར་བར་ནི། །རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་ཕྱིར། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་

Openers of the Chariot-ways 63
There is a purpose in [his] making a commitment to compose the text with
“in order to open up” because it is in order to bring the composition to a
[successful] conclusion, because Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:a
“Open up” means to open up just the topics; this is [Haribhadra’s]
commitment to compose [the text].
and Nāgārjuna’s Tree of Wisdom says:b
The excellent do not make many promises,
But if they do rarely make a commitment,
Like a picture carved in rock, they do not
Do otherwise, though they might die .
རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་ཞེས་རྩོམ་པར་དམ་བཅས་པ་ལ་དགོས་པ་ཡོད་དེ།
རྩོམ་པ་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཆེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས།
རྣམ་པར་དབྱེ་བ་ནི་དོན་ཙམ་ཞིག་དབྱེ་ཞེས་པ་སྟེ་རྩོམ་པར་དམ་
བཅའ་བའོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། ཤེས་རབ་སྡོང་བུ་ལས།
དམ་པ་མང་པོ་ཁས་འཆེ་མི་བྱེད་ལ། །གལ་ཏེ་དཀའ་བས་ཁས་ནི་
བླངས་གྱུར་ན། །རྡོ་ལ་རི་མོ་བྲིས་པ་ལྟ་བུར་ནི། །ཤི་ཡང་ གཞན་ [8a]
དུ་བྱེད་བར་མི་འགྱུར་རོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The subject, this [Clear Meaning] Commentary, has the four12—a purpose
and so on—because:
1. the Sūtras and the Ornament for the Clear Realizations together with
their contents are the subject matter;
2. realization that Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations is a
clarifier of the three Mother [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras] is the pur-
pose;
3. the exalted-knower-of-all-aspects that the intended trainees of this
[Clear Meaning Commentary] will attain is the essential purpose;
4. and the relationship of the latter with each of the former among the
three [the subject matter, the purpose, and the essential purpose] is the
relationship—this being implicitly indicated.
mtsho sngon edition, 20; ACIP edition, tsa, 13a.3; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 24.
prajñādaṇḍa/nītiśāstraprajñādaṇḍa, shes rab sdong bu/ lugs kyi bstan bcos shes rab
sdong bu; lha sa, lugs kyi bstan bcos, ngo, 103b.6.

64 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
འགྲེལ་པ་[དོན་གསལ་]འདི་ཆོས་ཅན། དགོས་སོགས་བཞི་ཡོད་དེ།
མདོ་དང་མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་དོན་དང་བཅས་པ་བརྗོད་བྱ་ཡིན།
རྒྱན་ཡུམ་གསུམ་གྱི་གསལ་བྱེད་དུ་རྟོགས་པ་དགོས་པ་ཡིན།
[འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་]འདིའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བའི་གདུལ་བྱས་ཐོབ་འགྱུར་
གྱི་རྣམ་མཁྱེན་ཉིང་དགོས་ཡིན། [བརྗོད་བྱ། དགོས་པ། ཉིང་དགོས་]དེ་
གསུམ་ཕྱི་མ་ཕྱི་མ་སྔ་མ་དང་འབྲེལ་བ་དེ་འབྲེལ་བ་ཡིན་ལ།
[འབྲེལ་བ་]དེ་ཤུགས་ལ་བསྟན་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The first [part of the reason which is that the Sūtras and the Ornament for
the Clear Realizations together with their contents are the subject matter]
is established because it mainly explains the contents of the Sūtras and the
treatise [Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations], because
Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary says:
[The Versified] Ornament of those [Mother Sūtras].
དང་པོ་[མདོ་དང་མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་དོན་དང་བཅས་པ་བརྗོད་བྱ་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་
སྟེ། མདོ་དང་བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་དོན་གཙོ་བོར་བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། [ཡུམ་གྱི་མདོ་]དེའི་རྒྱན། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The second [part of the reason which is that realization that Maitreya’s
Ornament for the Clear Realizations is a clarifier of the three Mother Per-
fection of Wisdom Sūtras is the purpose] is established because this [real-
ization that the Ornament is a clarifier of the three Mother Perfection of
Wisdom Sūtras] is the intent to be achieved by the Commentary, because
Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary says:
As an ornament for all.
and Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland of Eloquence says:a
The second [that is, the purpose] is the realization that it is an or-
nament for all three Mother [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras].
གཉིས་པ་[རྒྱན་ཡུམ་གསུམ་གྱི་གསལ་བྱེད་དུ་རྟོགས་པ་དགོས་པ་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ།
mtsho sngon edition, 21; ACIP edition tsa, 14a.3; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 25.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 65
[རྒྱན་ཡུམ་གསུམ་གྱི་གསལ་བྱེད་དུ་རྟོགས་པ་]དེ་འགྲེལ་པས་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཆེད་
ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། ཀུན་གྱི་རྒྱན་དུ་འགྱུར་བར་
ནི། །ཞེས་དང་། ལེགས་བཤད་གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། གཉིས་པ་[དགོས་
པ་]ནི། ཡུམ་གསུམ་གའི་རྒྱན་དུ་རྟོགས་པ་སྟེ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་
The third [part of the reason which is that the exalted-knower-of-all-as-
pects that the intended trainees of this (Clear Meaning Commentary) will
attain is the essential purpose] is established because attaining this is the
final purpose, because Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary says:
the perfection of wisdom
and Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:a
The third [the essential purpose] is the attainment of the pristine
wisdom of a One-Gone-Thus, or, by a different name, the perfec-
tion of wisdom, when in dependence upon this [Clear Meaning
Commentary] hearing, thinking, and meditation arrive at final
completion,.
གསུམ་པ་[(འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་)འདིའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བའི་གདུལ་བྱས་ཐོབ་འགྱུར་གྱི་
རྣམ་མཁྱེན་ཉིང་དགོས་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། [(འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་)འདིའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་
བའི་གདུལ་བྱས་ཐོབ་འགྱུར་གྱི་རྣམ་མཁྱེན་]དེ་ཐོབ་པ་དགོས་པ་མཐར་ཐུག་
ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན། ཞེས་དང་།
གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། གསུམ་པ་[ཉིང་དགོས་]ནི། [འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་
གསལ་]འདི་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་ཐོས་བསམ་སྒོམ་པ་མཐར་ཕྱིན་པ་ན།
དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་གང་ཡིན་པ་མིང་གཞན་ཤེར་
ཕྱིན་ཞེས་པ་ཐོབ་པ་ཡིན་ཏེ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
mtsho sngon edition, 21; ACIP edition tsa, 14a.3-4; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1,
25.

66 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
The fourth [part of the reason which is that the relationship of the latter
with each of the former among the three (the subject matter, the purpose,
and the essential purpose) is the relationship—this being implicitly indi-
cated] is established because, in regard to the relationship among these,
there must be a relationship of method and that arisen from method, be-
cause Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says: a
The fourth [that is, the relationship] is that the treatise and the pur-
pose or the two purposes [the purpose and essential purpose] are
related as cause and effect; this [relationship of the latter with each
of the former among the three—the subject matter, the purpose,
and the essential purpose] is implicit.
བཞི་པ་[བརྗོད་བྱ། དགོས་པ། ཉིང་དགོས་དེ་གསུམ་ཕྱི་མ་ཕྱི་མ་སྔ་མ་དང་འབྲེལ་བ་
དེ་འབྲེལ་བ་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། [བརྗོད་བྱ། དགོས་པ། ཉིང་དགོས་གསུམ་པོ་]འདིའི་
འབྲེལ་བ་ལ་ཐབས་ཐབས་བྱུང་གི་འབྲེལ་བ་དགོས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། བསྟན་བཅོས་དང་དགོས་པའམ་དགོས་པ་
གཉིས་རྒྱུ་འབྲས་སུ་འབྲེལ་བ་སྟེ། [བརྗོད་བྱ། དགོས་པ། ཉིང་དགོས་གསུམ་པོ་
ཕྱི་མ་ཕྱི་མ་སྔ་མ་དང་འབྲེལ་བ་]དེ་ནི་ཤུགས་ཀྱིས་སོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་
b. Decisive analysis
མཐའ་དཔྱད་པ་ལ།
1. With respect to the master Prajñākaramati’s accepting such [a presen-
tation of the opening stanza of Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commen-
tary], Dharmamitra’s Clear Words [Subcommentary on
(Haribhadra’s) “Clear Meaning Commentary”] says:b It follows that
mtsho sngon edition, 21; ACIP edition tsa, 14a.5; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 26.
2011 TBRC bla brang, 8a.6; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 6a.3. Here Gung-thang Kön-chog-
tan-pay-drön-me’s (gung thang dkon mchog bstan pa’i sgron me, 1762-1823) Beginnings
of an Annotative Commentary on (Jam-yang-shay-pa’s) “Decisive Analysis on the First
Chapter of the ‘Perfection of Wisdom’” (hereafter Beginnings of an Annotative Commen-
tary), (phar phyin skabs dang po'i mtha' dpyod kyi mchan 'grel rtsom 'phro; hereafter

Openers of the Chariot-ways 67
mchan 'grel rtsom 'phro), TBRC W22112-0727, 4a.6, (notes pa and pha) says:(the page
and line indicators in bold are Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s own and refer to
another, yet to be identified edition of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s text)
(pa) In general five types of commentary ('grel pa) are described: (1) a meaning
commentary indicating the essential points completely (don gyi gnad tshang bar
ston pa’i don 'grel); (2) a commentary on the difficult points explaining the dif-
ficult points in particular (dka’ gnad bye brag tu bshad pa’i dka' 'grel, pañjikā);
(3) a word commentary that glosses words focusing finely on the components of
words (tshig 'bru zhib tu gnyer ba’i tshig 'grel); (4) a verbal commentary indi-
cating just the measure of obtaining the meaning of the words (yig don gyi thob
tshod tsam ston pa’i ngag 'grel); and (5) an extensive commentary indicating
expansions together with branches (’phros pa yang lag dang gcas te ston pa’i
rgya cher 'grel). Among these [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary] is the
first.
(4b.5) [Jam-yang-shay-pa’s text says:]
because Dharmamitra’s Clear Words [Subcommentary on (Haribhadra’s)
“Clear Meaning Commentary”] says: “It is impossible for it to be accom-
plished thus through the [Clear Meaning] Commentary alone.”
(pha) Dharmamitra's own system asserts as the four [subject matter and so on]:
1. the verbal subject matter (sgra’i brjod bya) is the stanzas (tshigs su bcas pa,
kārikā) [of Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations]
2. the meaning subject matter (don gyi brjod bya) is the Mother Producer of Victors
(rgyal ba bskyed ma, jinajānanī) [the Perfection of Wisdom understood as the
three exalted knowledges and so forth, according to Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho
(gung thang blo gros rgya mtsho, 1851-1928/1930), Clarification of the Meaning
of the Thought of the Two—the “Decisive Analysis on the Perfection of Wisdom:
Jeweled Lamp” by the Supreme Lama Jam-yang(-shay-pa) and the “Annotative
Commentary” by the Foremost Named Dīpaṃ (Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-
drön-me), TBRC W1KG21227-L1KG21259, 14b.1]
3. the purpose is the good composition of [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning] Commen-
tary [which Dharmamitra asserts is in Haribhadra’s continuum according to
Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho]
4. the essential purpose is realization in dependence upon [Haribhadra’s Clear
Meaning] Commentary [by its trainees] that Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear
Realizations is an ornament of all three Mothers [the One Hundred Thousand,
Twenty-five Thousand, and Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras].
It follows that his own system that he posits is not logically feasible because it is
not logically feasible that the composition of [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning]
Commentary is the purpose of [Haribhadra’s] composing the Commentary. It
also follows that his way of refuting the other’s [that is, Prajñākaramati's] system
is not logically feasible because of the inner contradiction in (i) explaining that
its essential purpose, the exalted-knower-of-all-aspects, does not exist because
of the reason “it is not accomplished through the [Clear Meaning] Commentary
alone,” and (ii) explaining that the exalted-knower-of-all-aspects is the essential
purpose of the root text [Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations]. (6)

68 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
the purpose and the essential purpose are not logically feasible because an
exalted-knowledge-of-all-aspects cannot be attained through [Haribha-
dra’s] commentary alone.
Our response: [That an exalted-knowledge-of-all-aspects cannot be at-
tained through (Haribhadra’s) commentary alone] does not entail [that the
purpose and the essential purpose are not logically feasible]. The reason
[which is that an exalted-knowledge-of-all-aspects cannot be attained
through (Haribhadra’s) commentary alone] is established because Dhar-
mamitra’s Clear Words [Subcommentary on (Haribhadra’s) “Clear
Meaning Commentary”] says:
It is impossible for it to be accomplished thus through the [Clear
Meaning] Commentary alone.
སློབ་དཔོན་ཤེར་འབྱུང་དེ་ལྟར་འདོད་པ་ལ། ཚིག་གསལ་ན་རེ། [8b]
དགོས་པ་དང་ཉིང་དགོས་མི་འཐད་པར་ཐལ། འགྲེལ་བ་གཅིག་
བུས་རྣམ་མཁྱེན་ཐོབ་པར་བྱེད་མི་ནུས་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་མ་ཁྱབ།
[འགྲེལ་བ་གཅིག་བུས་རྣམ་མཁྱེན་ཐོབ་པར་བྱེད་མི་ནུས་པའི་]རྟགས་གྲུབ་སྟེ།
ཚིག་གསལ་ལས། དེ་ནི་དེ་ལྟར་གྲུབ་པ་ཉིད་འགྲེལ་བ་འབའ་ཞིག་
གིས་མི་སྲིད་ལ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
It follows that this [exposition by Dharmamitra] is not logically feasible
rather than the earlier [assertion by Prajñākaramati which Dharmamitra
refuted]13 because if [attaining nonabiding nirvāṇa] is not logically feasible
as the [Clear Meaning] Commentary’s essential purpose because it alone
cannot bring it about, then attaining [nonabiding] nirvāṇa is not logically
feasible as the essential purpose of the root text [Maitreya’s Ornament for
the Clear Realizations because it alone cannot bring it about, since without
depending on the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras the nonabiding nirvāṇa
cannot be attained].14 For, Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:
[Dharmamitra’s own refutation and presentation] are not logically
feasible rather than that [assertion by Prajñākaramati which he re-
futed].
Thus it follows that his own system is even more logically infeasible than [his]
refutation of the earlier assertion by Prajñākaramati.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 69
དེ་སྔ་མ་ལས་ཀྱང་མི་འཐད་པར་ཐལ། འགྲེལ་བ་ཁོ་ནས་སྒྲུབ་མི་
ནུས་པས་ཉིང་དགོས་སུ་མི་འཐད་ན། རྩ་བའི་ཉིང་དགོས་སུ་མྱང་
འདས་ཐོབ་པ་མི་འཐད་པའི་ཕྱིར། གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། དེ་ལས་
ཀྱང་མི་འཐད་དེ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
2. Also, someone says: a It follows that all three perfections of wisdom
[that is, text, path, and result perfections of wisdom] exist as the objects of
expression of homage of this [Clear Meaning Commentary] because the
syllogism, [that is, the above syllogistic explanation of the stanza of hom-
age15] is logically feasible. You cannot accept [that all three perfections of
wisdom exist as the objects of expression of homage of this Clear Meaning
Commentary] because it is reasonable that he makes an expression of hom-
age only to perfection of wisdom texts. It follows [that it is reasonable that
he makes an expression of homage only to perfection of wisdom texts]
because through praising perfection of wisdom texts, by implication he
praises the other two [that is, path perfection of wisdom and result perfec-
tion of wisdom] as well.
ཡང་ཁ་ཅིག་ན་རེ། [འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་]འདིའི་མཆོད་བརྗོད་ཡུལ་
དུ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་ག་ཡོད་པར་ཐལ། སྦྱོར་བ་འཐད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་འདིའི་མཆོད་བརྗོད་ཡུལ་དུ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་ག་ཡོད་
པར་]འདོད་མི་ནུས་ཏེ། གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ཁོ་ན་ལ་མཆོད་བརྗོད་
རིགས་པའི་ཕྱིར། [གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ཁོ་ན་ལ་མཆོད་བརྗོད་རིགས་པ་]དེར་
ཐལ། གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ལ་བསྟོད་པས་གཞན་[ལམ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་དང། འབྲས་
བུ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་]གཉིས་ལའང་དོན་གྱིས་བསྟོད་པར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
Our response: [That through praising perfection of wisdom texts, by im-
plication he praises the other two (that is, path perfection of wisdom and
result perfection of wisdom perfection of wisdom) as well] does not entail
[that it is reasonable that he makes an expression of homage only to per-
2011 TBRC bla brang, 8b.3; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 6a.6.

70 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
fection of wisdom texts]. The reason [which is that through praising per-
fection of wisdom texts, by implication he praises the other two (that is,
path perfection of wisdom and result perfection of wisdom) as well] is
established because it is like praising, by implication, all eight clear reali-
zations through praising the three exalted knowledgesa because the Mid-
dle-length Mother [the Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra]
says:b
Homage to the perfection of wisdom is homage to the pristine wis-
dom of exalted knowledge of all.
[གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ལ་བསྟོད་པས་གཞན་ལམ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་དང། འབྲས་བུ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གཉིས་
ལའང་དོན་གྱིས་བསྟོད་པར་འགྱུར་ན་གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ཁོ་ན་མཆོད་བརྗོད་རིགས་
པས་]མ་ཁྱབ། [གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ལ་བསྟོད་པས་གཞན་གཉིས་ལའང་དོན་གྱིས་
བསྟོད་པར་འགྱུར་བ་]རྟགས་གྲུབ་སྟེ། མཁྱེན་གསུམ་ལ་བསྟོད་པས་
མངོན་རྟོགས་བརྒྱད་ལ་དོན་གྱིས་བསྟོད་པར་འགྱུར་བ་བཞིན་
ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཡུམ་བར་མ་ལས། གང་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་
ཕྱིན་པ་ལ་ཕྱག་འཚལ་བ་དེ་ནི་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་ལ་
ཕྱག་འཚལ་བའོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
At the juncture of the statement of no entailment [that is, that through
praising perfection of wisdom texts, by implication he praises the other
two (that is, path perfection of wisdom and result perfection of wisdom)
as well does not entail that it is reasonable that he makes an expression of
homage only to perfection of wisdom texts], you cannot accept [that it is
reasonable that he makes an expression of homage only to perfection of
wisdom texts] because all three perfections of wisdom are explicitly indi-
cated in this [ expression of homage by Haribhadra], because Gyal-tshab’s
Ornament for the Essence says:c
The three exalted knowledges, or three exalted knowers (mkhyen gsum), are exalted-
knowers-of-all-aspects (rnam mkhyen), knowers of paths (lam shes) , and knowers of bases
(gzhi shes).
Haribhadra’s Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra in Eight Chapters
(pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi
shu lnga pa/ le’u brgyad ma), lha sa, shes phyin, nga, 176b.4.
kha, 5a.5-6.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 71
“Respectful homage.” To what? To the text, path, and result per-
fections of wisdom.
[གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ལ་བསྟོད་པས་གཞན་གཉིས་ལའང་དོན་གྱིས་བསྟོད་པར་འགྱུར་ན།
གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ཁོ་ན་ལ་མཆོད་བརྗོད་རིགས་པས་]མ་ཁྱབ་མཚམས་ལ་[གཞུང་
ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ཁོ་ན་ལ་མཆོད་བརྗོད་རིགས་པ་]འདོད་མི་ནུས་ཏེ། [མཆོད་
བརྗོད་]དེའི་དངོས་བསྟན་གྱི་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་ག་ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
རྣམ་བཤད་ལས། གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ། གང་ལ་ན་གཞུང་ལམ་འབྲས་
བུའི་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
Furthermore, it follows that all three perfections of wisdom exist in
what is explicitly indicated by this [expression of homage] because even
though, in general, statement or expression in praise of the text also makes
it by implication [into a praise] of the other two perfections of wisdom,
here he is mainly praising all three. It follows [that here he is mainly prais-
ing all three] because (1) there is genuine evidence why the praise is
mainly of all three [that is, text, path, and result perfections of wisdom,
and (2) there is also a genuine purpose.
གཞན་ཡང་། འདིའི་དངོས་བསྟན་ལ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་ག་ཡོད་
པར་ཐལ། སྤྱིར་གཞུང་ལ་བསྟོད་པ་སྨོས་པའམ་བརྗོད་པས་ཤེར་
ཕྱིན་གཞན་གཉིས་ལའང་དོན་གྱིས་འགྲུབ་ཀྱང་འདིར་གསུམ་
[9a]
ག་གཙོ་བོར་བསྟོད་པའི་ཕྱིར། [འདིར་གསུམ་ག་གཙོ་བོར་བསྟོད་པ་]དེར་
ཐལ། [གཞུང་ལམ་འབྲས་བུའི་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་]དེ་གསུམ་ག་གཙོ་བོར་བསྟོད་པ་
ལ་རྒྱུ་མཚན་ཡང་དག་ཡོད་པ་གང་ཞིག དགོས་པ་ཡང་དག་ཀྱང་
ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The first [part of the reason which is that there is genuine evidence why
the praise is mainly of all three, that is, text, path, and result perfections of
wisdom] is established because it is so that the intended trainees of this
[Clear Meaning Commentary] will understand they mainly must put all
three [text, path, and result perfections of wisdom] into practice. It follows

72 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
[that the praise is so that the intended trainees of this Clear Meaning Com-
mentary will understand they mainly have to put all three text, path, and
result perfections of wisdom into practice], because it is so those [intended
trainees of this Clear Meaning Commentary] will understand that to attain
the result perfection of wisdom they need to listen to and think about the
text perfection of wisdom and put into practice the path perfection of wis-
dom until they are about to be fully purified [that is, enlightened], because
Haribhadra’s Great Commentary [the Illumination] says:a
Thus, since through the gradual arising of understanding having
the nature of hearing, thinking, and meditation they attain the pris-
tine wisdom knowing all aspects, it has gone beyond, that is, it has
gone to very completion, due to which it is a perfection of wis-
dom.16
and so forth.
དང་པོ་[གཞུང་ལམ་འབྲས་བུ་ཤེས་ཕྱིན་དེ་གསུམ་ག་གཙོ་བོར་བསྟོད་པ་ལ་རྒྱུ་
མཚན་ཡང་དག་ཡོད་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། [འགྲེལ་པ་དོན་གསལ་]འདིའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་
བའི་གདུལ་བྱས་[གཞུང་ལམ་འབྲས་བུ་ཤེས་ཕྱིན་]དེ་གསུམ་ག་གཙོ་བོར་
ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་དགོས་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཆེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [འགྲེལ་པ་
དོན་གསལ་འདིའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བའི་གདུལ་བྱས་གཞུང་ལམ་འབྲས་བུ་ཤེས་ཕྱིན་དེ་གསུམ་
ག་གཙོ་བོར་ཉམས་སུ་ལེན་དགོས་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཆེད་ཡིན་པ་]དེར་ཐལ། [འགྲེལ་
པ་དོན་གསལ་འདིའི་ཆེད་དུ་བྱ་བའི་གདུལ་བྱ་]དེས་འབྲས་བུ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ཐོབ་
Haribhadra’s Illumination of the Perfection of Wisdom (abhisamayālaṃkārālokā
prajñāpāramitāyākhyā) in Unrai Wogihara, Abhisamayālaṃkārālokā Prajñāpāramitā
Vyākhyā, The Work of Haribhadra (Tokyo: The Toyo Bunko, 1932-5; reprint edition, To-
kyo: Sankibo Buddhist Book Store, 1973), 23:
evam-ādi-śruta-cintā-bhāvanāmaya-jñānodaya-krameṇa sarvākārajñānādhi-
gamāt pāraṃ prakarṣa-paryantam etīti vigṛhya;
’phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa’i bshad pa mngon
par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi snang ba (sde dge: shes phyin, cha, 18b.1;
English translation by Gareth Sparham, Abhisamayālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā, vols. 1-
4 (Fremont, Calif.: Jain Publishing Company, 2006-2011), vol. 1, 199. Hereafter cited as
Haribhadra’s Illumination; Wogihara’s edition; rgyan snang; Sparham, Abhisama-
yālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 73
པ་ལ་གཞུང་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་ལ་ཐོས་བསམ་དང་ལམ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་
ཉམས་ལེན་འཚང་རྒྱ་ཁའི་བར་དུ་དགོས་པ་ཤེས་པའི་ཆེད་ཡིན་
པའི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། [འཚང་རྒྱ་ཁ་]དེའི་བར་དུ་[གཞུང་ཤེས་ཕྱིན་དང་ལམ་ཤེར་
ཕྱིན་]དེ་ལ་ཐོས་བསམ་དང་ལམ་ལ་ཉམས་ལེན་དགོས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
འགྲེལ་ཆེན་ལས། དེ་ལྟར་ན་དང་པོ་ཐོས་པ་དང་། བསམ་པ་དང་།
སྒོམ་པའི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་སྐྱེ་བའི་རིམ་གྱིས་རྣམ་པ་
ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་རྟོགས་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཕ་རོལ་ཏེ་རབ་
ཀྱི་མཐར་འགྲོ་བ་ཡིན་པས་ན་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའོ། །ཞེས་སོགས་
གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The second [part of the reason which is that there is also a genuine
purpose for mainly praising all three] is established because [it is so that
(the intended trainees of this Clear Meaning Commentary) will realize that
the sūtras’ subject matter—all three perfections of wisdom—is the subject
matter of the root text [Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations]
and the commentary [Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning] because Haribhadra’s
Great Commentary [the Illumination] says:a
Haribhadra’s Illumination, Wogihara edition, 23:
atas trividhām api tat-sambandhinīm prativarṇikopadeśa-rahitaṃ prajñāpāra-
mitām eva prādhānyād adhikṛtyeti avadhāraṇaṃ. na tu teṣām eveti. bodhitraye
‘sya nānatrīyakatvenādhikārāt. tathā hy atraiva vakṣyati: śrāvakabhūmāv api
śikṣitukāmeneyam eva prajñāpāramitaiva śrotavyety-ādi.
rgyan snang, cha, 18b.4-5:
rnam pa gsum ka yang shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa nyid do zhes bya bar
bzung ba yin te/ gtso bo las dbang du byas pas so / de rnams nyid kyi ni ma yin
te/ ’di med na mi ’byung bas byang chub gsum ka’i dbang du byas pa’i phyir ro
// de yang ’di nyid las nyan thos kyi sa la slob par ’dod pas kyang shes rab kyi
pha rol tu phyin pa ’di mnyan par bya’o zhes bya ba la sogs pa ’chad par ’gyur
ba yin no//
Translated Sparham, Abhisamayālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā, vol. 1, 200. Here I have
supplied in translation the full passage that Jam-yang-shay-pa abbreviates.

74 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Even all three aspects [text perfections of wisdom texts, path per-
fections of wisdom, and result perfections of wisdom] are deter-
mined as perfections of wisdom themselves, this being treated in
terms of the main ones. [However,] it is not only [the perfections
of wisdom] of those [Buddhas] because since it is indispensable
[for all three enlightenments of Hearers, Solitary Realizers, and
Buddhas], it is treated in terms of all three enlightenments [of
Hearers, Solitary Realizers, and Buddhas]. Moreover, it will be
explained right here [in the Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtra]:a
Even those who want to train in the grounds of a Hearer
should hear this Perfection of Wisdom.
and so forth.
and because Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence says:b
By mentioning [that he respectfully bows to] the texts, he brings
in the other two as well, so here you should take it as all three
[perfections of wisdom].
and because Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence also says:c
It has a subject matter because it teaches the topics of the sūtras
and the treatise [Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations].
གཉིས་པ་[དེ་གསུམ་ག་གཙོ་བོར་བསྟོད་པ་ལ་དགོས་པ་ཡང་དག་ཀྱང་ཡོད་
པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། མདོའི་བརྗོད་བྱ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་ག་རྒྱན་རྩ་འགྲེལ་གྱི་
བརྗོད་བྱར་རྟོགས་པའི་ཆེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་ཆེན་ལས།
རྣམ་པ་གསུམ་ག་ཡང་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ཉིད་
དོ། །ཞེས་ངེས་པར་བཟུང་བ་ཡིན་ཏེ། གཙོ་བོ་ལས་དབང་དུ་བྱས་
པ་ཡིན་ནོ། །ནས། [དེ་རྣམས་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ནི་མ་ཡིན་ཏེ་འདི་མེད་ན་མི་འབྱུང་བས་
Eight Thousand Line Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra (aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā 6;
Wogihara edition, 41; [’phags pa] shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa), lha
sa, brgyad stong, ka, 188b.2; see also the English translation by Edward Conze, The Per-
fection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines and its Stanza Summary (Bolinas, Calif.: Four
Seasons Foundation, 1973), 84; hereafter cited as Conze, Eight Thousand.
kha, 5a.6.
kha, 5b.2.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 75
བྱང་ཆུབ་གསུམ་ཀའི་དབང་དུ་བྱས་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །] དེ་ཡང་འདི་ཉིད་ལས་
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་ས་ལ་བསླབ་པར་འདོད་པས་ཀྱང་། ཞེས་གསུངས་
པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། དེ་སྐད་དུ་རྣམ་བཤད་ལས། གཞུང་སྨོས་པས་
གཞན་གཉིས་ཀྱང་འགྲུབ་མོད་ཀྱི་འདིར་ནི་གསུམ་ག་བཟུང་བར་
བྱའོ།།ཞེས་ གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། ཡང་རྣམ་བཤད་ལས།
[9b]
བརྗོད་བྱ་ཡོད་དེ། མདོ་དང་བསྟན་བཅོས་ཀྱི་དོན་སྟོན་པའི་ཕྱིར།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
3. Also, someone explains:b That [stanza of homage17] indicates only the
object of refuge.
ཡང་ཁ་ཅིག [ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལ།ནས། གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ།ཞེས་པ་]དེས་
སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་ཡུལ་ཙམ་བསྟན་པར་བཤད་པ་
Our response: It follows that this also is not logically feasible because
even though Haribhadra’s [Clear Meaning] Commentary [only] says,
“[Respectful homage] to the perfection of wisdom,” it teaches all:
1. the mode of behavior
2. objects of observation, the three jewels,
3. hearing
4. thinking
5. meditating
during that time [of going for refuge], because it is like, for example, the
fact that the sentences in the condensed [Eight Thousand Perfection of
Wisdom Sūtra] explain [all the topics explained in the Hundred Thousand
and Twenty-five Thousand]. It follows [that it is like, for example, the fact
that the sentences in the condensed (Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtra) explain (all the topics explained in the Hundred Thousand and
Twenty-five Thousand)] because that [stanza of homage] explains the first
[the mode of behavior when going for refuge], also teaches the second [the
objects of observation, the three jewels], also explains how to hear, also
2011 TBRC bla brang, 9a.6,’di nyid kyis; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 6b.7, ’di nyid las.
2011 TBRC bla brang, 9b.1; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 7a.1.

76 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
explains how to think, and also explains how to meditate.
ཡང་མི་འཐད་པར་ཐལ། འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ་
ལ། །ཞེས་པས་ཀྱང་། [སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་]དེ་དུས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ལམ་དང་།
དམིགས་ཡུལ་དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་དང་ཐོས་བསམ་སྒོམ་པ་ཀུན་
བསྟན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། དཔེར་ན། ཡུམ་བསྡུས་པའི་ཚིག་དེས་བཤད་
པ་བཞིན་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [ཡུམ་བསྡུས་པའི་ཚིག་དེས་བཤད་པ་བཞིན་ཡིན་
པ་]དེར་ཐལ། [ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལ། ནས། གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ།ཞེས་པ་]དེས་
དང་པོ་[སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་དེ་དུས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ལམ་]བཤད་པ་གང་ཞིག གཉིས་པ་
[དམིགས་ཡུལ་དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་]ཡང་བསྟན། ཐོས་པ་བྱེད་ཚུལ་ཡང་
བཤད། བསམ་ཚུལ་ཡང་བཤད། སྒོམ་ཚུལ་ཡང་བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The first [which is that the stanza of homage explains the mode of behavior
when going for refuge] is established because since [Bodhisattvas] have
to be conscientious on all three occasions of hearing, thinking, and medi-
tating, they must sit cross-legged, because Haribhadra’s Great Commen-
tary says,18 “In a clean area Bodhisattvas in a cross-legged posture.”
དང་པོ་[སྐྱབས་འགྲོའི་དེ་དུས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ལམ་བཤད་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། ཐོས་བསམ་
སྒོམ་གསུམ་གའི་སྐབས་སུ་སྤྱོད་ལམ་བག་ལྡན་དགོས་པས་སྐྱིལ་
ཀྲུང་དགོས་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་ཆེན་ལས། བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་
ས་ཕྱོགས་གཙང་མར་སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང་བཅས་ཏེ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་
The second [which is that the stanza of homage teaches the objects of ob-
servation, the Three Jewels,] is established because it teaches that they ob-
serve all the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas because Haribhadra’s Great Com-
mentary says:
Having previously observed the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, from
the viewpoint of the bare words (ming) they thoroughly observe
with the root mind (rtsa ba’i sems) the modes of the perfection of

Openers of the Chariot-ways 77
wisdom that teach all phenomena as selfless, and with an analytic
mind (rjes su dpyod pa’i sems) they investigate the divisions of its
connotative units (tshig) by way of its chapters and so forth.
and such is also explained on the occasion [of the fourth chapter of Mait-
reya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations where it says],19 “Faith observ-
ing Buddhas and so forth.”
གཉིས་པ་[དམིགས་ཡུལ་དཀོན་མཆོག་གསུམ་བསྟན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། སངས་རྒྱས་
བྱང་སེམས་ཐམས་ཅད་ལ་དམིགས་པར་བསྟན་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་
ཆེན་ལས། སངས་རྒྱས་དང་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་ལ་དམིགས་པ་
སྔོན་དུ་འགྲོ་བས་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་ཞེས་པ་ནས།
[ཚུལ་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་བདག་མེད་པར་སྟོན་པར་བྱེད་པ་ལ་རྩ་བའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་མིང་གི་
སྒོ་ནས་ཡང་དག་པར་དམིགས་ལ། རྗེས་སུ་དཔྱད་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཚིག་གི་
རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ་]ལེའུ་ལ་སོགས་པའི་བྱེ་བྲག་གིས་བརྟག་པར་
བྱའོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། སངས་རྒྱས་སོགས་དམིགས་
དད་པ་དང་། །ཞེས་པའི་སྐབས་སུ་ཡང་བཤད་དོ། །
The third [which is that the stanza of homage explains how to hear] is
established because through such an approach [Bodhisattvas] apprehend
through connotative units (tshig) or bare words (ming) with their root, or
initial, mind because Haribhadra’s Great Commentary says,a “from the
viewpoint of the bare words (ming) they thoroughly focus with the root
mind.”
གསུམ་པ་[ཐོས་པ་བྱེད་ཚུལ་ཡང་བཤད་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། དེ་འདྲའི་སྒོ་ནས་
ཚིག་གམ་མིང་རྩ་བའམ་ དང་པོའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་འཛིན་པའི་
[10a]
ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་ཆེན་ལས། རྩ་བའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་མིང་གི་སྒོ་ནས་ཡང་
དག་པར་དམིགས་ལ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The fourth [which is that the stanza of homage explains how to think] is
established because preceded by such a [conscientious and cross-legged]
This citation is extracted from the midst of the one just above.

78 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
mode of behavior, refuge, and so on they analyze with analytic thoughta
that the words [that is, connotative units] do not and do have the [full]
meaning and so forth because Haribhadra’s Great Commentary says:b
[Then they enumerate with numbers the divisions of states of the
eight clear realizations, ascertain with comprehension each clear
realization’s nature, (ascertain) with realization the nonexistence
of superimposition and deprecation, and make a logical decision
through definite realization through direct and inferential valid
cognition;] they analyze the topics of the perfection of wisdom
with an intensely analytic mind (rnam par dpyod pa’i sems) by
way of four such aspects, and they analyze by way of two aspects
that the connotative units individually do not have the [full] mean-
ing and collectively have the [full] meaning, respectively.
བཞི་པ་[བསམ་ཚུལ་ཡང་བཤད་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། [བག་ལྡན་དང་སྐྱིལ་ཀྲུང་]དེ་ལྟ་
བུའི་སྤྱོད་ལམ་དང་སྐྱབས་སོགས་སྔོན་དུ་བཏང་ནས་རྗེས་སུ་
དཔྱོད་cཔའི་ཚིག་དང་དོན་ཡོད་མེད་སོགས་དཔྱོད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
འགྲེལ་ཆེན་ལས། [དེ་ནས་བགྲང་བས་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་གནས་
སྐབས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བས་གྲངས་གཟུང་བའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། གཞལ་བས་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ་སོ་
སོའི་རང་བཞིན་ངེས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། རྟོག་པས་སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པ་དང་སྐུར་པ་འདེབས་པ་
མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། ངེས་པར་རྟོག་པས་མངོན་སུམ་དང་རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པའི་ཚད་མས་
འཐད་པར་བྱས་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། དེ་ལྟར་]རྣམ་པ་བཞིས་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་
རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་དོན་ལ་དང་། སོ་སོ་བ་དང་བསྡུས་པ་གོ་རིམ་
བཞིན་དུ། ཞེས་པ་ནས། [དོན་མེད་པ་དང་དོན་དང་བཅས་པ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས་བྱ་
བས་ཡི་གེ་ལ་སྟེ། རྣམ་པ་འདི་དག་གིས་]རྣམ་པར་དཔྱོད་dཔའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་
Correcting rjes su spyod in 2011 TBRC bla brang (10a.2) and 2015 Go-mang Lhasa
(7a.7) to rjes su dpyod in accordance with rgyan snang, cha,18a.6-7.
Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the beginning and end of the passage; I have translated the
entire citation and added what precedes it to make the four aspects clear to the reader; with
this addition it continues from the previous long citation.
Correcting rjes su spyod in 2011 TBRC bla brang (10a.2) and 2015 Go-mang Lhasa
(7a.7) to rjes su dpyod in accordance with rgyan snang, cha,18a.6-7.
Correcting rnam par spyod in 2011 TBRC bla brang (10a.2) and 2015 Go-mang Lhasa

Openers of the Chariot-ways 79
དཔྱད་པར་བྱའོ། །ཞེས་སོ། །
The fifth [which is that the stanza of homage also explains how to medi-
tate] is established because [Bodhisattvas] must meditate through the root,
or first, mind and taking to mind the intensely analyzed signs, because
Haribhadra’s Great Commentary says:a
Then, with a mind of definite apprehension (nges par ’dzin pa’i
sems) they apprehend the signs in accordance with how they have
been intensely analyzed; with a mind of summarization (sdom pa’i
sems) the topics—as they have been analyzed—are fit together
with the root mind that focuses on the bare words; and with a mind
of hope together with aspiration (’dun pa dang lhan cig pa re ba
ba’i sems) they meditate on these topics in which they are inten-
sively training.
ལྔ་པ་[སྒོམ་ཚུལ་ཡང་བཤད་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། རྩ་བའམ་དང་པོའི་སེམས་
དང་རྣམ་པར་དཔྱད་པའི་མཚན་མ་དེ་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པས་སྒོམ་
དགོས་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་ཆེན་ལས། དེའི་འོག་ཏུ་ཇི་ལྟར་རྣམ་པར་
དཔྱད་པའི་མཚན་མ་དེ་ངེས་པར་འཛིན་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་བཟུང་
ལ། ནས། [ཇི་ལྟར་བརྟགས་པའི་དོན་ཉིད་མིང་ལ་དམིགས་པར་བྱེད་པའི་རྩ་བའི་
སེམས་ཉིད་དུ་སྡོམ་པའི་སེམས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་བཅུག་ལ། དོན་གང་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་སྦྱོར་བར་
འགྱུར་བ་དེ་]འདུན་པ་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་པ་རེ་བའི་སེམས་bཀྱིས་བསྒོམ་
པར་བྱའོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[That the stanza of homage explains the mode of behavior when going for
refuge, also teaches the objects of observation, the three jewels, also ex-
plains how to hear, also explains how to think, and also explains how to
(7a.7) to rnam par dpyod in accordance with rgyan snang, cha,18a.7.
Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the beginning and end of the passage; I have filled in and
translated the entire passage.
Correcting lhan cig brtse ba’i sems in 2015 Go-mang Lhasa (7b.2) to lhan cig pa re ba’i
sems in accordance with rgyan snang (cha,18a.7), 2011 TBRC bla brang (10a.4), and
Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho-tsho’s Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s “Decisive Anal-
ysis” and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations,” TBRC W1KG21227,
16b.1.

80 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
meditate] entails [that it is like, for example, the fact that the sentences in
the condensed (Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra) explain (all
the topics explained in the Hundred Thousand and Twenty-five Thousand)]
because these [ways to hear, think, and meditate] are the meaning of the
sūtra passage [in the Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra], a
“Founded on the perfection of wisdom.” Haribhadra’s Great Commentary
says:
Thus, through the stages of first generating consciousnesses hav-
ing the nature of hearing, thinking, and meditation they realize
pristine wisdom knowing all aspects, whereby it goes beyond, that
is, goes to the far limit, and hence is a “perfection of wisdom.”
[(ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལ། ནས། གུས་ཕྱག་འཚལ།ཞེས་པ་)དེས་དང་པོ་(སྐྱབས་
འགྲོའི་དེ་དུས་ཀྱི་སྤྱོད་ལམ་)བཤད་པ་གང་ཞིག གཉིས་པ་(དམིགས་ཡུལ་དཀོན་མཆོག་
གསུམ་)ཡང་བསྟན། ཐོས་པ་བྱེད་ཚུལ་ཡང་བཤད། བསམ་ཚུལ་ཡང་བཤད། སྒོམ་ཚུལ་
ཡང་བཤད་ན་དཔེར་ན། ཡུམ་བསྡུས་པའི་ཚིག་དེས་བཤད་པ་བཞིན་ཡིན་པས་]ཁྱབ་
སྟེ། [ཐོས་བསམ་བྱེད་ཚུལ་]འདི་དག་མདོ་ལས། ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་
The passage occurs near the beginning of the sūtra; Jam-yang-shay-pa’s point is that
Haribhadra finds all of these meanings in this brief clause in the sūtra. The context of the
clause is:
Then the Supramundane Victor said to the venerable Subhūti, “Subhūti, have
confidence [to explain] how—founded on the perfection of wisdom of the Bo-
dhisattvas, the great beings—the Bodhisattvas, the great beings, emerge into the
perfection of wisdom. (pratibhātu te subhūte bodhisattvānāṃ mahāsattvānāṃ
prajñāpāramitām ārabhya yathā bodhisattvā mahāsattvāḥ prajñāpāramitām
niryāyur iti)
དེ་ནས་བཅོམ་ལྡན་འདས་ཀྱིས་གནས་བརྟན་ཚེ་དང་ལྡན་པ་རབ་འབྱོར་ལ་བཀའ་སྩལ་
པ། རབ་འབྱོར། བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་
རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལས་བརྩམས་ཏེ། ཇི་ལྟར་བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་སེམས་དཔའ་ཆེན་པོ་
རྣམས་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་ལ་ངེས་པར་འབྱུང་བར་འགྱུར་བ་དེ་བཞིན་དུ་
ཁྱོད་སྤོབས་པར་བྱོས་ཤིག །
Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra, (aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāsūtra) cited
in Haribhadra’s Illumination, Wogihara edition, 22; rgyan snang, cha,18a.3-18b.1; Spar-
ham, vol. 1, 198-199.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 81
ཕྱིན་པ་ལས་བརྩམས་ཏེ། ཞེས་པའི་དོན་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་
ཆེན་ལས། དེ་ལྟར་ན་དང་པོ་ཐོས་། ནས། [པ་དང་བསམ་པ་དང་བསྒོམ་
པའི་རང་བཞིན་ཅན་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་སྐྱེ་བའི་རིམ་གྱིས། རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་
ཤེས་རྟོགས་པའི་ཕྱིར།]ཕ་རོལ་ཏེ་རབ་ཀྱི་མཐར་འགྲོ་བ་ཡིན་པས་ན་ཕ་
རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའོ། །ཞེས་སོ།
Furthermore, making an expression of worship to all three perfections
of wisdom here on this occasion has another purpose as well because it
has the purpose of realizing Great Vehicle refuge through thus making [an
expression of worship to all three perfections of wisdom]. It follows [that
another purpose of making homage to all three perfections of wisdom here
is realization of Great Vehicle refuge] because [making an expression of
worship to all three perfections of wisdom here on this occasion] has the
purpose of knowing the Great Vehicle refuge, explicitly indicating in this
[expression of worship] (1) the Buddha jewel contained within the result
perfection of wisdom and (2) the doctrine jewel contained within the path
perfection of wisdom, and thereupon understanding (3) the community
that properly achieves that [doctrine jewel] as the refuge assistant. That [it
has the purpose of knowing Great Vehicle refuge] follows because the root
[text, Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations,] and [Haribhadra’s
Clear Meaning] Commentary both make an expression of worship so that
it will be known that going for refuge must precede the beginning of hear-
ing, thinking, and so on, because Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence
says:a
You should know that authors of treatises initially state an expres-
sion of worship in order that [readers] will know that going for
refuge must precede the beginning of any religious activity of
hearing, thinking, meditating, and so on.
གཞན་ཡང་། སྐབས་འདིར་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་ཀར་མཆོད་བརྗོད་
མཛད་པ་ལ་དགོས་པ་གཞན་ཡང་ཡོད་པར་ཐལ། [ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་
ཀར་མཆོད་བརྗོད་]དེ་ལྟར་མཛད་པས་ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་
རྟོགས་པའི་དགོས་པ་ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱིར། [ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གསུམ་ཀར་མཆོད་བརྗོད་
kha, 5b.6.

82 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
དེ་ལྟར་མཛད་པས་ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་རྟོགས་པའི་དགོས་པ་ཡོད་པ་]དེར་ཐལ།
[མཆོད་བརྗོད་]དེའི་དངོས་བསྟན་གྱི་འབྲས་བུ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གྱིས་བསྡུས་
པའི་སངས་རྒྱས་དཀོན་མཆོག་དང་། ལམ་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གྱིས་ [10b]
བསྡུས་པའི་ཆོས་དཀོན་མཆོག་དངོས་སུ་བསྟན་ནས། [ཆོས་དཀོན་
མཆོག་]དེ་ཚུལ་བཞིན་སྒྲུབ་པའི་དགེ་འདུན་སྐྱབས་ཀྱི་ཟླ་གྲོགས་སུ་
གོ་བའི་ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་ཤེས་པའི་དགོས་པ་ཡོད་པའི་
ཕྱིར། [ཐེག་ཆེན་གྱི་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་ཤེས་པའི་དགོས་པ་ཡོད་པ་]དེར་ཐལ། ཐོས་
བསམ་སོགས་ཀྱི་ཐོག་མར་སྐྱབས་འགྲོ་སྔོན་དུ་འགྲོ་དགོས་པ་ཤེས་
པའི་ཆེད་དུ་རྩ་འགྲེལ་གཉིས་ཀས་མཆོད་བརྗོད་མཛད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
རྣམ་བཤད་ལས། ཐོས་བསམ་སྒོམ་གསུམ་སོགས་ཆོས་ལྡན་གྱི་བྱ་
བ་གང་བྱེད་པའི་ཐོག་མར་སྐྱབས་སུ་འགྲོ་བ་སྔོན་དུ་འགྲོ་དགོས་
པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཆེད་དུ་བསྟན་བཅོས་མཛད་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་མཆོད་
བརྗོད་ཐོག་མར་བཀོད་པར་ཤེས་པར་བྱའོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་
2. Explanation establishing it is reasonable to
compose the commentary
གཉིས་པ་[འགྲེལ་པ་རྩོམ་རིགས་པར་བསྒྲུབ་པ་]འཆད་པ་ལ།
There are four stanzas in Haribhadra’s [Clear Meaning] Commentary
about how he is in possession of the quintessential instructions of earlier
masters:a
Acting from complete affection due to affection for migrators,
These and the following stanzas are from Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary,
Amano edition, 3; 'grel pa don gsal (lha sa, sher phyin, ja, 78b). Jam-yang-shay-pa cites
only the first lines of the two passages. I have provided the entire citation.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 83
The Superior Asaṅga, refuge,
Having listened to the protector Ajita [Maitreya],
Made an exposition of the great treatises.20
Friend to the welfare of migrating beings, Vasubandhu—
Principally evincing his own inclination—
Provided commentary thoroughly depending
On objects of knowledge being [the nature] of inner [mind].21
Included among Superiors (ārya),
The one called Vimuktisenaa also,
Having seen that what they had done were not done [exactly],
With intelligence dwelling in the middle, also made explanatory
differentiation.22
After that, the Vimuktisena
Dwelling on the ground of faith,
Not finding all of the treatise,
Made an explanation concordant with him.23
སློབ་དཔོན་སྔ་མའི་མན་ངག་ལྡན་ཚུལ། འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། འགྲོ་ལ་
ཆགས་པས་ཀུན་ཆགས་མཛད། །སོགས་[འཕགས་པ་ཐོགས་མེད་སྐྱོབ་ཉིད་
ཀྱིས། །མི་ཕམ་མགོན་ལ་གསན་ནས་ནི། །བསྟན་བཅོས་ཆེན་པོའི་རྣམ་བཤད་
མཛད། །འགྲོ་དོན་རྩ་ལག་དབྱིག་གི་གཉེན། །རང་གི་མོས་པ་གཙོར་བྱེད་པས། །ཤེས་བྱ་
ནང་གི་ཡིན་པ་ལ། །ཡང་དག་རྟེན་ནས་རྣམ་པར་བཀྲོལ། །འཕགས་པའི་ཁོངས་སུ་
གཏོགས་པ་ཡི། །རྣམ་པར་གྲོལ་བ་ཞེས་བྱས་ཀྱང་། །དེས་བྱས་བྱས་པ་མིན་མཐོང་
ནས། །དབུ་མར་གནས་པའི་བློས་རྣམ་ཕྱེ། །དེ་ཡི་འོག་ཏུ་རྣམ་གྲོལ་སྡེ། །དད་པའི་ས་ལ་
གནས་པ་ཡིས། །བསྟན་བཅོས་མཐའ་དག་མ་རྙེད་པར། །རང་དང་རྗེས་མཐུན་རྣམ་
བཤད་བྱས། །]ཤོ་ལོ་ཀ་བཞི་བྱུང་།
There are two stanzas in Haribhadra’s [Clear Meaning] Commentary
about the two––how he is in possession of the wisdom realizing the inner
topics,24 and hence that it is reasonable for him to compose the commen-
tary:
How amazing that I have found
The treatise of all these
Which were illuminated in that way
Known as Āryavimuktisena.

84 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
And just some did not find exactly as it is.25
This profound path, extremely
Difficult to find by such
Was luckily found through the force of the Buddha.
It is reasonable for scholars to explore it.26
ནང་གི་དོན་རྟོགས་ཤེས་རབ་ལྡན་ཚུལ་དང་། དེས་ན་རྩོམ་རིགས་
པ་གཉིས་ནི། འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། དེ་ལྟར་མཁས་པས་སྣང་བྱས་
ཤིང་། །ནས། [འགའ་ཞིག་ཁོ་ནས་མ་རྙེད་པའི། །བསྟན་བཅོས་མཐའ་དག་འདི་དེ་
ལྟར། །རྙེད་པ་གང་དེ་ཡ་མཚན་ནོ། །དེ་ལྟས་ཤིན་ཏུ་རྙེད་དཀའ་བ། །ཟབ་མོའི་ལམ་འདི་
ཅི་ཞིག་ལྟར། །སངས་རྒྱས་དབང་གིས་རྙེད་པ་ནི༎] མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་དབྱེ་
བའི་རིགས། །ཞེས་པའི་ཚིགས་བཅད་གཉིས་བྱུང་།
[Decisive analysis
This has three parts: refuting mistakes, positing our own system, and dis-
pelling objections.
REFUTING MISTAKES]a
4. Some earlier Tibetans say:b The openers of chariot-ways who do not
rely on other commentators are limited to four—Nāgārjuna, Dignāga,
Vasubandhu, and the foremost holy Maitreya.
སྔོན་གྱི་བོད་དག་ན་རེ། འགྲེལ་བྱེད་གཞན་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པའི་ཤིང་
རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཕྱོགས་གླང་དབྱིག་གཉེན་རྗེ་བཙུན་
བྱམས་པ་བཞིར་ངེས་ཟེར་ན།
Our response: It follows that the two—Dignāga and the author of the Con-
quest Over Harm concerning the Three Mother [Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtras]—are not openers of chariot-ways because Dignāga’s Summary of
I have inserted the subtitles because this and the following two sections “positing our
own system” and “dispelling objections” anticipate the format Jam-yang-shay-pa will use
for each of the topics he discusses at length in later sections.
2011 TBRC bla brang, 10b.5; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 7a.1.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 85
the “Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra” follows Asaṅga’s sys-
tem, and the Conquest Over Harm concerning the Three Mother [Perfec-
tion of Wisdom Sūtras] cites passages from Nāgārjuna.
ཕྱོགས་གླང་དང་ཡུམ་གསུམ་གྱི་གནོད་འཇོམས་མཁན་པོ་གཉིས་
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པར་ཐལ། ཕྱོགས་གླང་གི་བརྒྱད་
སྟོང་དོན་བསྡུས་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་ལ། ཡུམ་
གསུམ་གནོད་འཇོམས་ཀྱིས་ཀླུ་ སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ལུང་དྲངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[11a]
The first [which is that Dignāga’s Summary of the “Eight Thousand Per-
fection of Wisdom Sūtra” follows Asaṅga’s system] is established because
the two modes of commentary by that [Summary of the “Eight Thousand
Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”]:
the mode of commentary on the [Eight Thousand Perfection of Wis-
dom] Sūtra about achieving meditation on emptiness as an antidote to
the ten distracting conceptualizations, that is, apprehensions of a self
of phenomena
the mode of commentary on the meaning of the three characters and
the sūtra
follow Maitreya’s Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes and
Asaṅga’s Summary of the Great Vehicle27 because Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden
Garland says:a
Though it is renowned thus [that those four each commented on
the thought of the Mother Sūtras without relying on other com-
mentaries on the thought], the main topics discussed in Dignāga’s
Summary of the “Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”:
1. the mode of commenting on the Sūtra passage giving guid-
ance on achieving the sixteen emptinesses as antidotes to the
ten distracting conceptualizations, and
2. the mode of commenting on the Sūtra passage on the three
natures [where Dignāga says]:b
mtsho sngon edition, 7; ACIP edition, tsa, 5b.6; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 9.
prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtha, stanzas 27-29ab; Tucci, 57:
prajñāpāramitāyāṃ hi trin samāśritya deśanā / kalpitaṃ paratantraṃ ca pa-
riniṣpannam eva ca // nāstītyādipadaiḥ sarvaṃ kalpitaṃ vinivāryate / māyopa-

86 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
In the Perfection of Wisdom
The teaching is based on a triad:
Just the imputational, the other-powered,
And the thoroughly established.
With words like, “It does not exist,”
[The Buddha] refutes all the imputational.
By means of examples like illusions,
He demonstrates the other-powered.
By the fourfold purification
He proclaims the thoroughly established.
In the Perfection of Wisdom
There is no other teaching.
respectively evince what is in Maitreya’s Differentiation of the
Middle and the Extremes and Asaṅga’s Summary of the Great Ve-
hicle; hence, it does not comment separately from the Doctrines
of Maitreya.
དང་པོ་[ཕྱོགས་གླང་གི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་དོན་བསྡུས་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱི་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་
འབྲང་བ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། [ཕྱོགས་གླང་གི་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་དོན་བསྡུས་]དེས་སྟོང་ཉིད་
སྒོམ་པ་རྣམ་གཡེང་གི་རྟོག་པ་སྟེ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་འཛིན་བཅུའི་
གཉེན་པོར་སྒྲུབ་པའི་མདོའི་འགྲེལ་ཚུལ་དང་། མཚན་ཉིད་གསུམ་
གྱི་དོན་དང་མདོའི་འགྲེལ་ཚུལ་གཉིས་དབུས་མཐའ་དང་ཐེག་
བསྡུས་གཉིས་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བའི་ཕྱིར། གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། དེ་
ལྟར་གྲགས་ཀྱང་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་དོན་བསྡུས་ཀྱི་། ཞེས་པ་ནས། [བརྗོད་
བྱའི་གཙོ་བོ་སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག་རྣམ་གཡེང་གི་རྟོག་པ་བཅུའི་གཉེན་པོར་སྒྲུབ་པ་ལ་
གདམས་པའི་མདོའི་འགྲེལ་ཚུལ་དང་། ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པར་ནི། །བསྟན་པ་གསུམ་
ལ་ཡང་དག་བརྟེན། །བརྟགས་པ་དང་ནི་གཞན་དབང་དང་། །ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ་ཁོ་
ནའོ། །མེད་ཅེས་བྱ་ལ་སོགས་ཚིག་གིས། །བཏགས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་འགོག་པ་སྟེ། །སྒྱུ་མ་ལ་
mādidṛṣṭāntaiḥ paratantrasya deśanā // prajñāpāramitāyāṃ hi nānyā bud-
dhasya deśanā
brgyad stong bsdus don; lha sa, shes phyin, pha, 293b.4-6.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 87
སོགས་དཔེ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས། །གཞན་གྱི་དབང་ནི་ཡང་དག་བསྟན། །རྣམ་པར་བྱང་བ་བཞི་
ཡིས་ནི། །ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ་རབ་ཏུ་བསྒྲགས། །ཤེས་རབ་ཕ་རོལ་ཕྱིན་པར་ནི། །སངས་རྒྱས་
ཀྱིས་ནི་གཞན་བསྟན་མེད། །ཅེས་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་གསུམ་གྱི་མདོ་འགྲེལ་ཚུལ་རྣམས་]རིམ་
པ་ལྟར་དབུས་མཐའ་དང་ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོ་བསྡུས་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་
བཞིན་སྣང་བས། བྱམས་ཆོས་ལས་ལོགས་སུ་བཀྲལ་བ་མིན་ཞིང་།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The second [which is that the Conquest Over Harm concerning the Three
Mother [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras] cites passages from Nāgārjuna] is
established because the author [of the Conquest Over Harm concerning
the Three Mothers] is not Vasubandhu, and [the Conquest Over Harm con-
cerning the Three Mothers] cites Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the
Middle, Called “Wisdom” in the context of the sixteen emptinesses and of
the absence of truly established production and cessation and of the ab-
sence of truly established thoroughly afflicted and purified [classes of phe-
nomena]. The first [which is that the author (of the Conquest Over Harm
concerning the Three Mothers) is not Vasubandhu] is established because
Daṃṣhṭasena composed it, because Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland
says:a
It is renowned in earlier old works that this Conquest Over Harm
was composed by the Kashmiri Daṃṣhṭasena.
and because in commenting on [the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra passage],b
“in the final five hundred [year] period,” it states Shāntarakṣhita’s mode
of explanation.
གཉིས་པ་[ཡུམ་གསུམ་གནོད་འཇོམས་ཀྱིས་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ལུང་དྲངས་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ།
[ཡུམ་གསུམ་གནོད་འཇོམས་]དེ་རྩོམ་པ་པོ་དབྱིག་གཉེན་མ་ཡིན་པ་
གང་ཞིག སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག་དང་སྐྱེ་འགག་ཀུན་ཉོན་དང་རྣམ་
བྱང་བདེན་མེད་སྐབས་སུ་རྩ་ཤེ་དྲངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། དང་པོ་[ཡུམ་
mtsho sngon edition, 5; ACIP edition, tsa, 5a.1; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 7.
Conze, Large Sutra, 311-312. See Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 3, 91-92, and vol. 1,
9, and 547 note to legs bshad gser phreng, mtsho sngon edition, 6.18-20.

88 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
གསུམ་གནོད་འཇོམས་དེ་རྩོམ་པ་པོ་དབྱིག་གཉེན་མ་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། ཁ་ཆེ་མཆེ་
པའི་སྡེས་མཛད་པ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། གནོད་
འཇོམས་འདི་སྔོན་གྱི་ཡི་གེ་རྙིང་པ་རྣམས་ལས་ཁ་ཆེ་མཆེ་བའི་
སྡེས་མཛད་པར་གྲགས་ལ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། ལྔ་བརྒྱ་
ཐ་མའི་འགྲེལ་པར་ཞི་འཚོའི་བཤད་ཚུལ་བཀོད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The second [which is that (the Conquest Over Harm concerning the Three
Mothers) cites Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle, Called
“Wisdom” in the context of the sixteen emptinesses and of the absence of
truly established production and cessation and the absence of truly estab-
lished thoroughly afflicted and pure (classes of phenomena)] is established
because Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:a
The textual commentary [Conquest Over Harm], having cited pas-
sages from Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle,
Called “Wisdom” in the context of the explaining the sixteen emp-
tinesses and the non-existence of production and cessation and of
the thoroughly afflicted and pure [classes of phenomena].
and because since its explanation of how emptiness is empty is like the
Enumerators’ (Sāṃkhya) other-emptiness, it does not accord with any
Mind-Only School or Middle Way School, and hence it is refuted at length
in Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence.b
གཉིས་པ་[སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག་དང་སྐྱེ་འགག་ཀུན་ཉོན་དང་རྣམ་བྱང་བདེན་མེད་
སྐབས་སུ་རྩ་ཤེ་དྲངས་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། གཞུང་འགྲེལ་ནི་
སྟོང་ཉིད་བཅུ་དྲུག་དང་། སྐྱེ་འགག་ཀུན་བྱང་མེད་པར་བཤད་
mtsho sngon edition, 7; ACIP edition, tsa, 6a.3-4; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 9-
10.
Tsong-kha-pa’s Treatise Differentiating the Interpretable and the Definitive: The Es-
sence of Eloquence (drang ba dang nges pa’i don rnam par phye ba’i bstan bcos legs bshad
snying po / drang nges legs bshad snying po), translated by Jeffrey Hopkins in Emptiness
in the Mind-Only School of Buddhism (Berkeley and Los Angeles, California: University
of California Press, 1999), 225-233. Also in Robert A. F. Thurman, Tsong Khapa’s Speech
of Gold in the Essence of True Eloquence, (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press,
1984).

Openers of the Chariot-ways 89
པའི་སྐབས་སུ་རྩ་ཤེའི་ལུང་དྲངས་ནས། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་
དང་། སྟོང་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྟོང་ཚུལ་གྲངས་ཅན་གྱི་གཞན་སྟོང་ལྟར་
བཤད་པ་དབུ་སེམས་གང་དང་མི་མཐུན་པས་ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་
པོར་རྒྱས་པར་བཀག་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
5. Also, someone says:a A person who comments under his own power
on the thought of the [Buddha’s] high sayings is the definition of an
opener of a chariot-way.
To that, someone flings the fallacy: Subhūti would be [an opener of a
chariot-way].
ཡང་ཁ་ཅིག་bགསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ་རང་དབང་དུ་འགྲེལ་
བའི་གང་ཟག་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་དུ་འཇོག་ཟེར།
[ཁ་ཅིག་གསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ་རང་དབང་དུ་འགྲེལ་བའི་གང་ཟག་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་
འབྱེད་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་དུ་འཇོག་ཟེར་བ་]དེ་ལ་ཁ་ཅིག་ན་རེ། རབ་འབྱོར་
སྐྱོན་དུ་འཕེན་ནོ། །
Our response: For the former, it [absurdly] follows that the subject,
Asaṅga, comments under his own power on the thought of the [Buddha’s]
high sayings because of being an opener of a chariot-way. It follows [that
the subject, Asaṅga, is an opener of a chariot-way] because of being the
opener of the Mind-Only chariot-way. It follows [that the subject, Asaṅga,
is the opener of the Mind-Only chariot-way] because of opening the Mind-
Only way in his Five Treatises on the Grounds in accordance with the
Sūtra Unraveling the Thought, because Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Es-
sence says:c
the Master [Asaṅga] in his Five Treatises on the Grounds, two
Summaries, and so on opened well the chariot-way of Cognition-
2011 TBRC bla brang, 11a.6; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 8b.1.
2011 TBRC bla brang, 11a.6, reads yang kho na re; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 8b.1, reads
yang kha cig.
kha, 4a.1-2; this is the latter part of the citation above, 57; the earlier part is cited just
below.

90 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Only.
སྔ་མ་ལ་ཐོགས་མེད་ཆོས་ཅན། གསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ་རང་
དབང་དུ་འགྲེལ་བར་ཐལ། ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[ཐོགས་མེད་ཆོས་ཅན། ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]དེར་ཐལ། སེམས་ཙམ་
པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། དགོངས་འགྲེལ་ལྟར་
ས་སྡེར་སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་པ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། རྣམ་
བཤད་ལས། སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་ས་སྡེ་ལྔ་སྡོམ་རྣམ་གཉིས་ལ་སོགས་
པར་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་ཙམ་གྱི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ལེགས་པར་ཕྱེ་ཞིང་།
ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
You cannot accept the root [consequence that Asaṅga comments under his
own power on the thought of the (Buddha’s) high sayings] because he fol-
lows the three—the Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras, Differentiation
of the Middle and the Extremes, and Differentiation of Phenomena and
Noumenon which are commentary by the Foremost Holy [Maitreya], be-
cause Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence says, a “Following these
three treatises, [the Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras and the two
Differentiations].”
རྩ་བར་[ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱིས་གསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ་རང་དབང་དུ་འགྲེལ་
པར་]འདོད་མི་ནུས་ཏེ། རྗེ་བཙུན་གྱིས་བཀྲལ་བའི་འབྱེད་གཉིས་
མདོ་སྡེ་རྒྱན་གསུམ་གྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲང་བའི་ཕྱིར། རྣམ་བཤད་ལས།
བསྟན་བཅོས་གསུམ་པོ་དེ་དག་གི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས། ཞེས་
གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence, kha, 4a.1; see the previous footnote. The full
citation is:
Following these three treatises, [the Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras and
the two Differentiations,] and in accordance with the way the Sūtra Unraveling
the Thought differentiates the interpretable and definitive, the Master [Asaṅga]
in his Five Treatises on the Grounds, two Summaries, and so on opened well the
chariot-way of Cognition-Only.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 91
For the latter [who in reaction to the above statement:
A person who comments under his own power on the thought
of the (Buddha’s) high sayings is the definition of an opener of
a chariot-way.
flings as a fallacy, “Subhūti would be (an opener of a chariot-way),” our
response is:] Well then, it [absurdly] follows that the subject, Subhūti, is
capable of explaining the meaning of the perfection of wisdom without
depending on another because [according to you] he comments under his
own power on the meaning of the perfection of wisdom. If you accept [that
Subhūti is capable of explaining the meaning of the perfection of wisdom
without depending on another], it [absurdly] follows that it is not that even
though [Subhūti] is not able to teach under his own power (1) endless
doors of meditative stabilization of a Victor’s child and (2) the noumenon,
[the Buddha] empowers [Subhūti’s] speech in order to make known that
the Buddha’s power is inconceivable because you accept [that Subhūti is
capable of explaining the meaning of the perfection of wisdom without
depending on another].
ཕྱི་མ་[(ཁ་ཅིག་གསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ་རང་དབང་དུ་འགྲེལ་བའི་གང་ཟག་ཤིང་
རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད་དུ་འཇོག་ཟེར་བ་)དེ་ལ་ཁ་ཅིག་ན་རེ། རབ་འབྱོར་སྐྱོན་
དུ་འཕེན་པ་]ལ། འོ་ན། རབ་འབྱོར་གྱིས་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་དོན་གཞན་ལ་
མ་བརྟེན་པར་བཤད་ཐུབ་པར་ཐལ། [རབ་འབྱོར་]དེས་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་
དོན་རང་དབང་དུ་འགྲེལ་བ་དེའི་ཕྱིར། [རབ་འབྱོར་གྱིས་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་
དོན་གཞན་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པར་བཤད་ཐུབ་པར་]འདོད་ན། རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཀྱི་ཏིང་
ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་སྒོ་མཐའ་ཡས་པ་དང་། ཆོས་ཉིད་[རབ་འབྱོར་]དེས་
རང་དབང་དུ་སྟོན་མི་ཐུབ་ཀྱང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཐུ་བསམ་གྱིས་
མི་ཁྱབ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཆེད་དུ་[རབ་འབྱོར་]དེའི་ངག་བྱིན་གྱིས་
བརླབས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པར་ཐལ། [རབ་འབྱོར་གྱིས་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་གྱི་དོན་གཞན་ལ་
མ་བརྟེན་པར་བཤད་ཐུབ་པར་]འདོད་པ་དེའི་ཕྱིར།
If you accept [that it is not that even though Subhūti is not able to teach

92 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
under his own power (1) endless doors of meditative stabilization of a Vic-
tor’s child and (2) the noumenon, (the Buddha) empowers Subhūti’s
speech in order to make known that the Buddha’s power is inconceivable],
it [absurdly] follows that the statement in Haribhadra’s Great Commen-
tary:a
[The Buddha empowers Subhūti] for the sake of helping those
who are trained upon seeing power, thinking, “Inconceivable is
the power of the skillful means of the One-Gone-Thus because
even those incapable in all aspects teach!”
is not logically feasible because [according to you] it is not that even
though he [Subhūti] is not able to teach under his own power, [the Buddha]
empowers his speech in order to help them have faithful devotion in him
[the Buddha]. There is entailment because there is a meaning of “even
those incapable in all aspects teach!”
[རྒྱལ་སྲས་ཀྱི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་གྱི་སྒོ་མཐའ་ཡས་པ་དང་། ཆོས་ཉིད་རབ་འབྱོར་དེས་རང་
དབང་དུ་སྟོན་མི་ཐུབ་ཀྱང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཐུ་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་པར་ཤེས་པའི་ཆེད་
དུ་རབ་འབྱོར་དེའི་ངག་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པར་]འདོད་ན། འགྲེལ་
ཆེན་ལས། དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་ཐབས་ལ་མཁས་པའི་
མཐུ་ནི་བསམ་གྱིས་མི་ཁྱབ་སྟེ། གང་གི་ཕྱིར་རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་
མི་ནུས་པ་ཡང་སྟོན་ཏོ། །ཞེས་མཐུ་ཡང་དག་པར་ མཐོང་བའི་ [12a]
གདུལ་བྱ་རྣམས་ལ་ཕན་གདགས་པར་བྱ་བའི་ཕྱིར། ཞེས་གསུངས་
པ་མི་འཐད་པར་ཐལ། [རབ་འབྱོར་]དེས་རང་དབང་དུ་སྟོན་མི་
ཐུབ་ཀྱང་དེ་ལ་མོས་པ་ལ་ཕན་གདགས་པའི་ཆེད་དུ་ངག་བྱིན་
གྱིས་བརླབས་པ་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཁྱབ་སྟེ། རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དུ་
མི་ཐུབ་པ་ཡང་སྟོན་ཏོ་ཞེས་པའི་དོན་ཡོད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
Haribhadra’s Illumination of the “Ornament,” Wogihara edition, 22:
acintyo vā tathāgatānām upāya-kauśalaprabhāvo yasmāt sarvathāśaktenāpi
deśyata iti prabhāvasaṃdarśanavineyānām
rgyan snang, cha,17b.4-5; Sparham, Abhisamayālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā, vol. 1, 198.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 93
Furthermore, it [absurdly] follows that the meaning of the statement
in Haribhadra’s Great Commentary:a
By way of empowering [his] speechb to expound the perfection of
wisdom, [the Supramundane Victor said] to the Superior Subhūti
[when his mind was on something else, “Make it clear” and so on
in order to make him focus].
is not established because [according to you] it is not the meaning of that
[passage in Haribhadra’s Great Commentary] that Subhūti’s speech has
been empowered [by the Buddha] to give such an exposition [of the per-
fection of wisdom]. You have come [to assert the reason].c
གཞན་ཡང་། འགྲེལ་ཆེན་ལས། ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་
བཤད་པ་ལ་ངག་བྱིན་གྱིས་བརླབས་པའི་སྒོ་ནས་འཕགས་པ་རབ་
འབྱོར། ཞེས་པའི་དོན་མ་གྲུབ་པར་ཐལ། རབ་འབྱོར་གྱིས་[ཤེར་
རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ་]དེ་ལྟར་སྟོན་པའི་ངག་བྱིན་གྱིས་
བརླབས་པ་དེ་[འགྲེལ་ཆེན་གྱི་ལུང་]དེའི་དོན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར།
རྟགས་སོང་།
Furthermore, it [absurdly] follows the meaning of the passage from
the Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra:d
Haribhadra’s Illumination of the “Ornament,” Wogihara edition, 22:
prajñāpāramitābhāṣaṇaṃ prati vāgadhiṣṭhānadvāreṇāryasubhūtim
rgyan snang, cha,17b.5; Sparham, Abhisamayālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā, vol. 1, 198.
The bracketed material is drawn from Haribhadra’s text.
Depending upon the context, vāgadhiṣṭhānadvāreṇa can also mean “authorizing by
voice,” as distinct from other ways (by physical gesture or by thought) in which a One-
Gone-Thus might start an amanuensis off on a discourse, and indeed this may be such a
context here.
The term rtags song means rtags khas blangs song ba.
Eight Thousand (aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā, 4; Wogihara edition,29):
yat kiṃcid āyuṣman śariputra bhagavataḥ śrāvakā bhāṣante deśayanty
upadiśyanty udīrayanti prkāśayanti samprakāśayanti sa sarvas tathāgatasya
puruṣakāro veditavyaḥ
lha sa, brgyad stong, 3a.6-3b.2; Conze, The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines
and its Stanza Summary, 83. The Indian and Tibetan translators rendered puruṣakāra,

94 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
All that the Hearers propound, teach, demonstrate, express, illu-
minate, and thoroughly illuminate is to be known as the power of
the person of the One-Gone-Thus.
is not established because [according to you] it is not the meaning of that
[passage in the Eight Thousand] that the teaching of such by the Hearers
is the power of the One-Gone-Thus. If you say that the reason [which is
that it is not the meaning of that [passage in the Eight Thousand] that the
teaching of such by the Hearers is the power of the One-Gone-Thus] is not
established, you have come [to contradict your assertion that Subhūti com-
ments under his own power on the meaning of the perfection of wisdom].
གཞན་ཡང་། བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པ་ལས། ཉན་ཐོས་རྣམས་ནི་གང་ཅི་སྨྲ་
བ་དང་། སྟོན་པ་དང་། ཉེ་བར་སྟོན་པ་དང་། བརྗོད་པར་བྱེད་པ་
དང་། གསལ་བར་བྱེད་པ་དང་། ཡང་དག་པར་གསལ་བར་བྱེད་
པ་དེ་ཐམས་ཅད་ནི་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྐྱེས་བུའི་མཐུ་ཡིན་
པར་རིག་པར་བྱའོ། །ཞེས་པའི་ལུང་དོན་མ་གྲུབ་པར་ཐལ། ཉན་
ཐོས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ལྟར་སྟོན་པ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་མཐུ་ཡིན་པ་
[བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པའི་ལུང་]དེའི་དོན་མ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ལྟར་
སྟོན་པ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་མཐུ་ཡིན་པ་བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པའི་ལུང་དེའི་དོན་མ་ཡིན་
པར་རྟགས་]མ་གྲུབ་ན་སོང་།
If you say there is no entailment [that is, that it is not the meaning of that
(passage in the Eight Thousand) that the teaching of such by the Hearers
is the power of the One-Gone-Thus does not necessitate that the meaning
of the passage from the Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra:
All that the Hearers propound, teach, demonstrate, express, illu-
minate, and thoroughly illuminate is to be known as the power of
the person of the One-Gone-Thus.
is not established], then it very absurdly follows that there is not a single
power of the person of the One-Gone-Thus!
which might seem merely to mean “a person’s act/work/effort,” as skyes bu'i mthu, “a per-
son’s power/magic/force/might.”

Openers of the Chariot-ways 95
[ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ལྟར་སྟོན་པ་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་མཐུ་ཡིན་པ་(བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པའི་
ལུང་)དེའི་དོན་མ་ཡིན་ན། བརྒྱད་སྟོང་པ་ལས། ཉན་ཐོས་རྣམས་ནི་གང་ཅི་སྨྲ་བ་དང་།
སྟོན་པ་དང་། ཉེ་བར་སྟོན་པ་དང་། བརྗོད་པར་བྱེད་པ་དང་། གསལ་བར་བྱེད་པ་དང་།
ཡང་དག་པར་གསལ་བར་བྱེད་པ་དེ་ཐམས་ཅད་ནི་དེ་བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྐྱེས་བུའི་
མཐུ་ཡིན་པར་རིག་པར་བྱའོ། །ཞེས་པའི་ལུང་དོན་མ་གྲུབ་པའི་]མ་ཁྱབ་ན། དེ་
བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྐྱེས་བུའི་མཐུ་ཅིག་མེད་པར་ཐལ་ལོ། །
Furthermore, it very absurdly follows that the manifold statements in
many sūtras, “Through the Buddha’s power venerable Shāriputra [said],”
and the explanations (1) in the Questions of King Dhāraṇīṣhvara Sūtra
where it says,a “The freedom of Hearers comes from words,” and also (2)
in the root text [Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations, V.15d]
where it says,28 “Actualities endowed and non-endowed,” are not logically
feasible because [according to you] those [Hearers] teach the perfection of
wisdom under their own power.
TBRC W26071 (Lhasa, 148) mdo sde, vol. 57, 267b.3, which reads sgra rjes 'gro for
sgra phyir 'gro. This line is cited in Dharmamitra’s Explanation of (Haribhadra’s) “Com-
mentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Ornament for the Clear Realizations’”: Very Clear Words (shes
rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi tshig
le’ur byas pa’i ’grel bshad tshig rab tu gsal ba), (sde dge shes phyin), 57b4:
ji skad du 'phags pa byang chub sems dpa'i sde snod las / nyan thos rnams kyi
rnam grol sgra phyir 'gro
on Haribhadra’s comment in his Clear Meaning Commentary:
Scripture says, “Hearers rely on instruction by others and awaken to their own
enlightenment,” and they also “turn others to the wholesome by a spoken demon-
stration of doctrine.”
Dharmamitra adds, “That is also why they are called “trainees” (slob ma), because they
definitely need a “master” (slob dpon).” He is explaining Maitreya’s Ornament for the
Clear Realizations, II.6, concerning Solitary Victors:
Because the self-arisen realize [enlightenment] by themselves,
They also do not need to be taught by others,
[Whereby] it is said that the wisdom
Of the rhinoceros-like is more profound.
Dharmamitra’s citation is found in the Bodhisattva Scriptural Collection (āryabodhisatt-
vapiṭaka, 'phags pa byang chub sems dpa'i sde snod), sde dge, dkon brtsegs, kha, 255b.1-
294a.7, and ga, 1b.1-205b.1; lha sa, dkon brtsegs, ga, 139a.2; cp. ga, 132b.3.

96 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
གཞན་ཡང་། མདོ་དུ་མ་ལས། སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་མཐུས་ཚེ་དང་ལྡན་
པ་ཤཱ་རིའི་བུས། ཞེས་པ་དུ་མ་དང་། གཟུང་རྒྱལ་གྱིས་ཞུས་པ་ལས།
ཉན་ཐོས་རྣམས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་གྲོལ་སྒྲ་ཕྱིར་འགྲོ །ཞེས་དང་། རྩ་བ་ལས་
ཀྱང་། དངོས་པོ་ལྡན་དང་མི་ལྡན་དང་། །ཞེས་བཤད་པ་རྣམས་མི་
འཐད་པར་ཐལ་ལོ། ། [ཉན་ཐོས་]དེ་དག་གིས་རང་དབང་དུ་ཤེར་
ཕྱིན་སྟོན་པ་[12b]དེའི་ཕྱིར།
Therefore, due to this [evidence that those Hearers are unable to teach the
perfection of wisdom under their own power] it is established that even
Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga are not able to explain [the perfection of wisdom]
under their own power, because those who have not attained the going-as-
a-hero meditative stabilization are not able to explain [the perfection of
wisdom] under their own power, because Chandrakīrti explains this [same
point] in his Commentary on (Nāgārjuna’s) “Sixty Stanzas of Reason-
ing.”a
[ཉན་ཐོས་དེ་དག་གིས་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་རང་དབང་དུ་སྟོན་མི་ནུས་པ་]དེས་ན་[ཉན་ཐོས་
དེ་དག་གིས་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་རང་དབང་དུ་སྟོན་མི་ནུས་པའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན་]འདིས་ནི་ཀླུ་
སྒྲུབ་དང་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་། རང་དབང་དུ་བཤད་མི་ཐུབ་
པར་གྲུབ་སྟེ། དཔའ་བར་འགྲོ་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་མ་ཐོབ་པར་
[རང་དབང་དུ་བཤད་པ་]དེ་མི་ཐུབ་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། རིགས་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ་
པའི་འགྲེལ་པར་ཟླ་བས་བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར།b
yuktiṣaṣṭikāvṛtti, rigs pa drug cu pa'i ’grel pa.
The version of this sentence in the 2015 Go-mang Lhasa edition (9a.6) eliminates one
reason clause:
དེས་ན་འདིས་ནི་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་དང་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་། རང་དབང་དུ་བཤད་མི་ཐུབ་པར་གྲུབ་སྟེ།
དཔའ་བར་འགྲོ་བའི་ཏིང་ངེ་འཛིན་མ་ཐོབ་པར་དེ་མི་ཐུབ་པར་རིགས་པ་དྲུག་ཅུ་པའི་འགྲེལ་པར་
ཟླ་བས་བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར།

Openers of the Chariot-ways 97
6. Also, someone says:a Openers of chariot-ways are limited in number to
two, Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga, because Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Elo-
quence says:b
Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga who, like the sun, illumined
The supreme teaching of the Conqueror29 for beings below, on,
and above the earth
Through opening well chariot-ways for the two modes30 of the
scriptures31 of the One Gone to Bliss.
ཡང་ཁ་ཅིག་ན་རེ། ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ལ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཐོགས་མེད་
གཉིས་སུ་གྲངས་ངེས་པར་ཐལ། ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ་ལས། བདེ་
གཤེགས་གསུང་རབ་ཚུལ་གཉིས་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ། །ལེགས་པར་ཕྱེ་
བས་རྒྱལ་བའི་བསྟན་པ་མཆོག །ས་གསུམ་འགྲོ་ལ་ཉི་ལྟར་གསལ་
མཛད་པ། །ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཐོགས་མེད། ཅེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
Our response: This does not entail [that openers of chariot-ways are lim-
ited in number to two, Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga,] because it is merely indi-
cating that [openers of chariot-ways] are limited to those two [Nāgārjuna
and Asaṅga] with respect to those having the basis of a humanc who dif-
ferentiate the interpretable and definitive. You cannot accept [that openers
of chariot-ways are limited in number to two, Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga,] be-
cause the Foremost Holy Maitreya, the author of the Ornament [for the
Clear Realizations], is an opener of a chariot-way. It follows [that the
Foremost Holy Maitreya, the author of the Ornament [for the Clear Real-
izations], is an opener of a chariot-way] because:
the opener of the chariot-way commenting on the meaning of the pro-
found [emptiness], which is what is explicitly indicated in the Mother
2011 TBRC bla brang, 12b.1; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 9a.6.
drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP edition, 1a.3-4. The translation is taken from
Jeffrey Hopkins, Emptiness in the Mind-Only School of Buddhism (Berkeley and Los An-
geles, California: University of California Press, 1999), 67. The lines are from a homage
at the beginning of Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence; Jam-yang-shay-pa omits
the words expressing homage since they are not relevant to his point; with them the first
two lines of the translation are:
I bow down with the top of my head to the feet
Of the honorable Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga who, like the sun, illumined…
mi'i rten can, that is to say, those who are humans.

98 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
[Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras], as the Middle Way, and
the opener of the chariot-way commenting on the hidden meaning, the
clear realizations, as the Middle Way in eight categories and seventy
topics,
are limited to only the two, Nāgārjuna and the Foremost Holy Maitreya
[respectively] because Tsong-kha-pa’s Golden Garland says:a
So it is [as Dharmamitra explains]––two commentarial systems on
the perfection of wisdom, the Foremost Holy [Maitreya]’s and
Nāgārjunapāda’s.
མ་ཁྱབ་སྟེ། དྲང་ངེས་འབྱེད་པའི་མིའི་རྟེན་ཅན་ལ་[ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཐོགས་
མེད་]དེ་གཉིས་སུ་ངེས་པར་བསྟན་པ་ཙམ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [ཤིང་རྟའི་
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ལ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཐོགས་མེད་གཉིས་སུ་གྲངས་ངེས་པར་]འདོད་མི་ནུས་ཏེ།
རྒྱན་རྩོམ་པ་པོའི་རྗེ་བཙུན་བྱམས་པ་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་
པའི་ཕྱིར། [རྒྱན་རྩོམ་པ་པོའི་རྗེ་བཙུན་བྱམས་པ་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་
པ་]དེར་ཐལ། ཡུམ་གྱི་དངོས་བསྟན་གྱི་ཟབ་དོན་དབུ་མར་འགྲེལ་
བའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་དང་། སྦས་དོན་མངོན་རྟོགས་
དབུ་མར་དངོས་པོ་བརྒྱད་དོན་བདུན་ཅུར་འགྲེལ་བའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་རྗེ་བཙུན་བྱམས་པ་གཉིས་ཁོ་ནར་ངེས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
ལེགས་བཤད་གསེར་འཕྲེང་ལས། རྗེ་བཙུན་དང་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཞབས་
གཉིས་ཀྱིས་ཤེར་ཕྱིན་འགྲེལ་ཚུལ་གཉིས་བྱུང་ངོ་། །ཞེས་བྱ་བར་
ཡང་གནས་སོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
7. Also, someone says:b It follows that Asaṅga is not an opener of a char-
iot-way because he [Asaṅga] commented on the two systems, Mind-Only
and Middle Way, following the two openers of chariot-ways, the Foremost
Holy Maitreya and Nāgārjuna.
mtsho sngon edition, 8; ACIP edition 6a.6; Sparham, Golden Garland, vol. 1, 10.
2011 TBRC bla brang, 12b.5; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 9b.3.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 99
ཡང་ཁ་ཅིག་ན་རེ། ཐོགས་མེད་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པར་
ཐལ། [ཐོགས་མེད་]དེས་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་རྗེ་བཙུན་བྱམས་པ་
དང་། ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་དབུ་སེམས་ཀྱི་ལུགས་
གཉིས་བཀྲལ་བའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
Our response: [That Asaṅga commented on the two systems, Mind-Only
and Middle Way, following the two openers of chariot-ways, the Foremost
Holy Maitreya and Nāgārjuna] does not entail [that Asaṅga is not an
opener of a chariot-way] because he is an opener of the chariot-way of
Mind-Only without depending on a commentator having the fleshly shape
of a human.a The reason [which is that Asaṅga is an opener of the chariot-
way of Mind-Only without depending on a commentator having the
fleshly shape of a human] is established because he opened the chariot-
way of Mind-Only based on three [of the five] Doctrines of Maitreya––the
two Differentiations [the Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes
and the Differentiation of Phenomena and Noumenon] and the Ornament
[for the Great Vehicle Sūtras],b and even though he did not cite the scrip-
tures of Nāgārjuna, nevertheless following his reasoning he commented
on Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle as the
Middle Way system.
[ཐོགས་མེད་དེས་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་རྗེ་བཙུན་བྱམས་པ་དང་། ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་
འབྲངས་ནས་དབུ་སེམས་ཀྱི་ལུགས་གཉིས་བཀྲལ་ན། ཐོགས་མེད་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་
མ་ཡིན་པས་]མ་ཁྱབ་སྟེ། [ཐོགས་མེད་]དེ་མིའི་ཤ་ཚུགས་ཅན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་
mi'i sha tshugs can.
The five Doctrines of Maitreya (byams chos lnga) are:
1. Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle, mahāyānottaratantraśāstra,
theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma’i bstan bcos
2. Differentiation of Phenomena and Noumenon, dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga, chos dang
chos nyid rnam par ’byed pa
3. Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes, madhyāntavibhaṅga, dbus dang mtha’
rnam par ’byed pa
4. Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras, mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, theg pa chen po’i
mdo sde rgyan gyi tshig le’ur byas pa
5. Ornament for the Clear Realizations, abhisamayālaṃkāra, mngon par rtogs pa’i
rgyan.

100 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
བྱེད་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པར་སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་ ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ [13a]
ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [(ཐོགས་མེད་)དེ་མིའི་ཤ་ཚུགས་ཅན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་བྱེད་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་
པར་སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པའི་]རྟགས་གྲུབ་སྟེ། རྗེ་
བཙུན་གྱི་བྱམས་ཆོས་འབྱེད་གཉིས་རྒྱན་དང་གསུམ་ལ་བརྟེན་
ནས་སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་ལ། ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ལུང་མ་
དྲངས་ཀྱང་རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་རྒྱུད་བླ་མ་དབུ་མའི་
ལུགས་སུ་བཀྲལ་བའི་ཕྱིར།
The first [part of the reason which is that Asaṅga opened the chariot-
way of Mind-Only based on three (of the five) Doctrines of Maitreya––the
two Differentiations (the Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes
and the Differentiation of Phenomena and Noumenon) and the Ornament
(for the Great Vehicle Sūtras)] is established because Gyal-tshab’s Orna-
ment for the Essence says:a
Following these three treatises, [the Ornament for the Great Vehi-
cle Sūtras and the two Differentiations,] and in accordance with
the way the Sūtra Unraveling the Thought differentiates the inter-
pretable and definitive, the Master [Asaṅga] in his Five Treatises
on the Grounds, b two Summaries, c and so on opened well the
chariot-way of Cognition-Only.
དང་པོ་[རྗེ་བཙུན་གྱི་བྱམས་ཆོས་འབྱེད་གཉིས་རྒྱན་དང་གསུམ་ལ་བརྟེན་ནས་
kha, 4a.1-2, cited above, 57. Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the beginning and end of the pas-
sage.
The Five Treatises on the Grounds are:
1. Grounds of Yogic Practice (yogācārabhūmi, rnal ’byor spyod pa’i sa)
2. Compendium of Ascertainments (nirṇayasaṃgraha / viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī, rnam
par gtan la dbab pa bsdu ba)
3. Compendium of Bases (vastusaṃgraha, gzhi bsdu ba)
4. Compendium of Enumerations (paryāyasaṃgraha, rnam grang bsdu ba)
5. Compendium of Explanations (vivaraṇasaṃgraha, rnam par bshad pa bsdu ba)
The Two Summaries are:
1. Summary of Manifest Knowledge (abhidharmasamuccaya, chos mngon pa kun btus)
2. Summary of the Great Vehicle (mahāyānasaṃgraha, theg pa chen po bsdus pa)

Openers of the Chariot-ways 101
སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བར་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། རྣམ་བཤད་ལས། བསྟན་
བཅོས་གསུམ་པོ་དེ་དག་གི་ནས། [རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་མདོ་སྡེ་དགོངས་
འགྲེལ་དུ་དྲང་ངེས་འབྱེད་པའི་ཚུལ་དང་མཐུན་པར་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་ས་སྡེ་ལྔ་སྡོམ་
རྣམ་གཉིས་ལ་སོགས་པར་]རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་ཙམ་གྱི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་
ལེགས་པར་ཕྱེ་ཞིང་། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The second [part of the reason which is that even though Asaṅga did
not cite the scriptures of Nāgārjuna, nevertheless following his reasoning
he commented on Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great
Vehicle as the Middle Way system] is established because he equally de-
scribes the two—the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras and the Matrix of the
One Gone Thus Sūtra—as teaching the absence of true existence, because
Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence says:a
In Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle
it is explained that the extensive, medium-length, and condensed
Mother [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras] and the Matrix of the One-
Gone-Thus Sūtrab clearly teach without difference that the object
of observation of the path is the emptiness of true existence of all
phenomena, the ultimate truth free from all proliferations that:
is to be taught at a later time to those whose continuums have
been ripened through familiarization with the system of Cog-
nition-Only
and is to be taught right from the first to those in the Great
Vehicle lineage who have the supreme faculties
and definitely must be realized even to attain Hearer enlight-
enment and Solitary Realizer enlightenment.
Since the master Asaṅga in commentary on thatc made clarifica-
tion exactly in accordance with [Maitreya’s] thought, you should
not think that he differs from the protector Nāgārjuna, the opener
kha, 4a.1-2, cited above, 55. Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the beginning and end of the pas-
sage.
tathāgatagarbhasūtra, de bzhin gshegs pa'i snying po'i mdo.
Asaṅga’s Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Ve-
hicle (mahāyānottaratantraśāstravyākhyā, theg pa chen po’i rgyud bla ma’i bstan bcos kyi
rnam par bshad pa).

102 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
of the chariot-way relative to the first differentiation of the inter-
pretable and definitive, because he is following just him [Nāgār-
juna].
གཉིས་པ་[ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ལུང་མ་དྲངས་ཀྱང་རིགས་པའི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་རྒྱུད་བླ་
མ་དབུ་མའི་ལུགས་སུ་བཀྲལ་བར་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། ཤེར་མདོ་དང་དེ་བཞིན་
གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོའ་ི མདོ་གཉིས་ཀྱིས་བདེན་མེད་བསྟན་པར་
མཚུངས་པར་བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར། རྣམ་བཤད་ལས། རྒྱུད་བླ་མའི་
བསྟན་བཅོས་ལས་ནི། ནས། [རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་ཙམ་གྱི་ཚུལ་ལ་གོམས་པས་
རྒྱུད་སྨིན་པར་བྱས་པ་རྣམས་ལ་ཡང་དུས་ཕྱིས་བསྟན་པར་བྱ་ཞིང་། ཐེག་པ་ཆེན་པོའི་
རིགས་ཅན་དབང་པོ་མཆོག་ཏུ་གྱུར་པ་རྣམས་ལ་དང་པོ་ཉིད་ནས་བསྟན་པར་བྱ་བ་
ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ་དང་། རང་སངས་རྒྱས་ཀྱི་བྱང་ཆུབ་ཐོབ་པ་ལ་ཡང་ངེས་པར་
རྟོགས་དགོས་པའི་ལམ་གྱི་དམིགས་པ་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་བདེན་པས་སྟོང་པ་དོན་དམ་
པའི་བདེན་པ་སྤྲོས་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དང་བྲལ་བ་མདོ་རྒྱས་འབྲིང་བསྡུས་གསུམ་དང་། དེ་
བཞིན་གཤེགས་པའི་སྙིང་པོའི་མདོས་ཁྱད་པར་མེད་པར་གསལ་བར་སྟོན་པར་འཆད་
ལ། དེ་ཉིད་སློབ་དཔོན་ཐོགས་མེད་ཀྱིས། དེའི་འགྲེལ་པར། དགོངས་པ་ཇི་ལྟ་བ་བཞིན་
དུ་གསལ་བར་མཛད་པས་དྲང་ངེས་འབྱེད་ཚུལ་དང་པོ་ལ་ལྟོས་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་
འབྱེད་]མགོན་པོ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ལས་ལོགས་སུ་བསམ་པར་མི་བྱ་སྟེ། དེ་
ཉིད་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
You cannot accept the root [consequence that Asaṅga is not an opener
of a chariot-way] because he is the opener of the chariot-way of Mind-
Only.
རྩ་བར་[ཐོགས་མེད་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པར་]འདོད་མི་ནུས་ཏེ།
སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར།
8. About this formulation someone says:a Asaṅga is not an opener of a
chariot-way without depending on another commentator having the fleshly
shape of a human because of commenting on Maitreya’s Treatise on the
2011 TBRC bla brang, 13a.4; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 10a.1.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 103
Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle following Nāgārjuna.
བྱས་པ་ལ་ཁོ་ན་རེ། ཐོགས་མེད་མིའི་ཤ་ཚུགས་ཅན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་
བྱེད་གཞན་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པར་
ཐལ། ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་རྒྱུད་བླ་མ་བཀྲལ་བའི་ཕྱིར་
ན་
Our response: [That he comments on Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later
Scriptures of the Great Vehicle following Nāgārjuna] does not entail [that
Asaṅga is not an opener of a chariot-way without depending on another
commentator having the fleshly shape of a human] because even though
due to the reason [that he comments on Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later
Scriptures of the Great Vehicle following Nāgārjuna] he is not the opener
of the chariot-way of the Middle Way, he opened the chariot-way of Mind-
Only without depending on a human commentator such as Nāgārjuna and
so forth.
[ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་རྒྱུད་བླ་མ་བཀྲལ་ན། ཐོགས་མེད་མིའི་ཤ་ཚུགས་ཅན་
གྱི་འགྲེལ་བྱེད་གཞན་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པས་]མ་ཁྱབ་
སྟེ། [ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་རྗེས་སུ་འབྲངས་ནས་རྒྱུད་བླ་མ་བཀྲལ་བ་]དེའི་རྒྱུ་མཚན་གྱིས་
དབུ་མ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མ་ཡིན་ལ། སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་
ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་སོགས་མིའི་འགྲེལ་བྱེད་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པར་
ཕྱེ་བའི་ཕྱིར།
9. About this, someone says:a It follows that whoever is an opener of a
chariot-way of the Middle Way necessarily is an opener of a chariot-way
because whoever is an opener of the chariot-way of Mind-Only necessarily
is an opener of a chariot-way. It follows [that whoever is an opener of the
chariot-way of Mind-Only necessarily is an opener of a chariot-way] be-
cause Asaṅga is that [an opener of a chariot-way]. If you accept [that who-
ever is an opener of a chariot-way of the Middle Way necessarily is an
opener of a chariot-way], it follows that the subject, the master Bud-
dhapālita, is that [an opener of a chariot-way] because of being that [an
2011 TBRC bla brang, 13a.6; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 10a.2.

104 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
opener of the chariot-way of the Middle Way]. The reason [which is that
Buddhapālita is an opener of a chariot-way of the Middle Way] is estab-
lished, because of being the opener of the chariot-way of the [Middle Way]
Consequence School.
དེ་ལ་ཁོ་ན་རེ། དབུ་མ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་aན་ཤིང་
རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་དགོས་པར་ཐལ། སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་དགོས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་དགོས་
པ་]དེར་ཐལ། ཐོགས་མེད་[ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་]དེ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[དབུ་མ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་དགོས་
པར་]འདོད་ན། སློབ་དཔོན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཆོས་ཅན། [ཤིང་
རྟའི་སྲོལ་བྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]དེར་ཐལ། [དབུ་མ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་བྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]དེའི་
ཕྱིར། [སློབ་དཔོན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་དབུ་མ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་བྱེད་ཡིན་
པ་]རྟགས་གྲུབ་སྟེ། ཐལ་འགྱུར་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་
པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
Our response: [Being the opener of the chariot-way of the (Middle Way)
Consequence School] does not entail [being the opener of the chariot-way
of the Middle Way]. The reason [which is that Buddhapālita is the opener
of the chariot-way of the (Middle Way) Consequence School] is estab-
lished because he is the initial opener of the tradition, like a chariot’s path-
way, of establishing the thought of Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on
the Middle, Called “Wisdom” as the absence of true existence mainly
through consequences.32 It follows [that Buddhapālita is the initial opener
of the tradition, like a chariot’s pathway, of establishing the thought of
Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle, Called “Wisdom” as the
absence of true existence mainly through consequences] because Chan-
drakīrti explains that he opened a tradition that way [of the thought of
Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle, Called “Wisdom” as the
Correcting min in 2011 TBRC bla brang (13a.6) to yin in accordance with 2015 Go-mang
Lhasa (10a.2).

Openers of the Chariot-ways 105
absence of true existence mainly through consequences], because Tsong-
kha-pa’s Treatise Differentiating Interpretable and Definitive Meanings:
The Essence of Eloquence says:a
In the Clear Words [Chandrakīrti] having demonstrated that Bud-
dhapālita does not assert autonomy and having demonstrated (1)
many proofs that it is unsuitable for a Proponent of the Middle
Way to use autonomous [syllogisms] and (2) much damage to the
opposite position, [he]33 opens the chariot-way [of the Middle Way
Consequence School].34
[ཐལ་འགྱུར་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན། དབུ་མ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་བྱེད་ཡིན་
པས་]མ་ཁྱབ། [སློབ་དཔོན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས། ཐལ་འགྱུར་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་
བྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]རྟགས་གྲུབ་སྟེ། རྩ་ཤེའི་དགོངས་པ་གཙོ་བོར་ཐལ་
འགྱུར་གྱིས་བདེན་མེད་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་ལམ་སྲོལ་ལྟ་བུའི་
ལུགས་སྲོལ་ཐོག་མར་འབྱེད་མཁན་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [རྩ་ཤེའི་དགོངས་
པ་གཙོ་བོར་ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱིས་བདེན་མེད་དུ་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་ལམ་སྲོལ་ལྟ་བུའི་
ལུགས་སྲོལ་ཐོག་མར་འབྱེད་མཁན་ཡིན་པ་]དེར་ཐལ། [རྩ་ཤེའི་དགོངས་པ་གཙོ་
བོར་ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱིས་བདེན་མེད་དུ་]དེ་ལྟར་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བར་ཟླ་གྲགས་ཀྱིས་
བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར། དྲང་ངེས་རྣམ་འབྱེད་ལས། ཚིག་གསལ་ལས།
སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་རང་རྒྱུད་མི་བཞེད་པ་དང་། དབུ་མ་པས་
རང་རྒྱུད་བྱ་མི་རིགས་པའི་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་དང་བཟློག་ཕྱོགས་ལ་གནོད་
བྱེད་མང་དུ་བསྟན་ནས། ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་ལ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་
10. About this, someone says:b It follows that in this [passage from Tsong-
kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence] the demonstrator (1) of many proofs
drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP edition, 81b.5; La Vallée Poussin, Prasannapadā,
14.1-36.2. The translation is taken from Hopkins’ draft translation in “Emptiness in the
Consequence School of Buddhism,” 69.
2011 TBRC bla brang, 13b.3; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 10a.5.

106 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
that it is unsuitable for a Proponent of the Middle Way to use autonomous
[syllogisms] and (2) of much damage to the opposite position, autonomy,
is Buddhapālita because Buddhapālita is the opener of the chariot-way
where [Tsong-kha-pa] says, “opens the chariot-way.”
དེ་ལ་ཁོ་ན་རེ། འདིའི་དབུ་མ་པས་རང་རྒྱུད་བྱ་མི་རིགས་བའི་
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་དང་། བཟློག་ཕྱོགས་རང་རྒྱུད་ལ་གནོད་བྱེད་མང་དུ་
སྟོན་མཁན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཡིན་པར་ཐལ། ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་
ལ། ཞེས་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མཁན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་
ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
Our response: [That Buddhapālita is the opener of the chariot-way where
(Tsong-kha-pa) says, “opens the chariot-way,”] does not entail [that in this
(passage) the demonstrator (1) of many proofs that it is unsuitable for a
Proponent of the Middle Way to use autonomy (syllogisms) and (2) of
much damage to the opposite position, autonomy, is Buddhapālita] be-
cause even though Chandrakīrti is the demonstrator of the proofs and the
refutations, Buddhapālita opened the chariot-way of the Consequence
School. It follows [that even though Chandrakīrti is the demonstrator of
the proofs and the refutations, Buddhapālita opened the chariot-way of the
Consequence School] because he [Buddhapālita] proves the meanings in
Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle, Called “Wisdom”
mainly by way of consequences, because Buddhapālita’s [Commentary
on (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”] says:a
buddhapālitamūlamadhyamakavṛtti; the first lines of the extract as found in Chan-
drakīrti’s Clear Words (La Vallée Poussin, Prasannapadā, 14.1) are:
na svata utpadyante bhāvāḥ/ tadutpādavaiyarthyāt/ atiprasaṅgadoṣācca/ na hi
svātmanā vidyamānānāṃ padārthānāṃ punarutpāde prayojanamasti/ atha san-
napi jāyeta/ na kadā cinna jāyeta//
dbu ma rtsa ba’i ’grel pa buddha pā li ta (sde dge, dbu ma, tsa, 161b-4-6. Jam-yang-shay-
pa cites only the first, middle, and last lines of the extract, minus the last reason clause.
The translation is from Hopkins, Maps of the Profound, 474, as modified in his draft pub-
lication “Where is the Middle?” which includes translations of the source texts for Jam-
yang-shay-pa’s presentation of the “Opposite of the Consequences” (thal bzlog) and “Com-
patibly Appearing Subjects” (chos can mthun snang ba) sections in his Decisive Analysis
of (Chandrakīrti’s) “Supplement to Nāgārjuna’s ‘Treatise on the Middle’”: Treasury of
Scripture and Reasoning, Thoroughly Illuminating the Meaning of the Profound, Entrance
for the Fortunate / Great Exposition of the Middle (dbu ma ’jug pa’i mtha’ dpyod lung rigs

Openers of the Chariot-ways 107
Things are not produced from self because their production
[again] would be just senseless and because production would be
endless. It is thus: the production-againa of things already existing
in their own entities is purposeless. If, though existent, they are
produced, they would never not be produced. Hence, that also is
not accepted. Therefore, respectively, things are not produced
from self.
They also are not produced from other. Why? For it would
[absurdly] follow that everything would be produced from every-
thing.
They also are not produced from both self and other because
[such] would entail the fallacies of both [production from self and
production from other].
They also are not produced causelessly because it would [ab-
surdly] follow that everything always would be produced from
everything and because there would be the fallacy that all en-
deavor would be just senseless.
[ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་ལ། ཞེས་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མཁན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཡིན་
ན། འདིའི་དབུ་མ་པས་རང་རྒྱུད་བྱ་མི་རིགས་བའི་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་དང་། བཟློག་ཕྱོགས་རང་
རྒྱུད་ལ་གནོད་བྱེད་མང་དུ་སྟོན་མཁན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཡིན་པས་]མ་ཁྱབ་སྟེ།
སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་དང་གནོད་བྱེད་སྟོན་མཁན་ཟླ་གྲགས་ཡིན་ཀྱང་སངས་
རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཀྱིས་ཐལ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བའི་ཕྱིར།
[སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་དང་གནོད་བྱེད་སྟོན་མཁན་ཟླ་གྲགས་ཡིན་ཀྱང་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཀྱིས་
ཐལ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བ་]དེར་ཐལ། དེས་རྩ་ཤེའི་དོན་རྣམས་
གཙོ་བོར་ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས་སྒྲུབ་པར་མཛད་པའི་ཕྱིར། བུདྡྷ་
པཱ་ལི་ཏ་ལས། དངོས་པོ་རྣམས་བདག་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་དེ། ནས། [དེ་
gter mdzod zab don kun gsal skal bzang ’jug ngogs / dbu ma chen mo). Hopkins points out
that Jam-yang-shay-pa emphasizes the importance—for understanding Bhāvaviveka’s ob-
jections—of Buddhapālita’s lead-in question and answer and final sentence within which
this extract is embedded but which Jam-yang-shay-pa does not cite here; Hopkins has dealt
with the issue at length, highlighting the originality and clarity of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s ex-
planation.
yang skye ba, punarutpāda.

108 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
དག་གི་སྐྱེ་བ་དོན་མེད་པ་ཉིད་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། སྐྱེ་བ་ཐུག་པ་མེད་པར་འགྱུར་
བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །འདི་ལྟར་དངོས་པོ་བདག་གི་བདག་ཉིད་དུ་ཡོད་པ་རྣམས་ལ་ཡང་སྐྱེ་བ་
དགོས་པ་མེད་དོ། །གལ་ཏེ་ཡོད་ཀྱང་ཡང་སྐྱེ་ན་ནམ་ཡང་མི་སྐྱེ་བར་མི་འགྱུར་བས་དེ་
ཡང་མི་འདོད་དེ། དེའི་ཕྱིར་རེ་ཞིག་དངོས་པོ་རྣམས་བདག་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་དོ། །གཞན་
ལས་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་དེ། ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཞེ་ན། ཐམས་ཅད་ལས་ཐམས་ཅད་སྐྱེ་བར་ཐལ་བར་
འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །བདག་དང་གཞན་གཉིས་ལས་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་དེ།]གཉིས་ཀའི་
སྐྱོན་དུ་ཐལ་བར་འགྱུར་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །ནས། [རྒྱུ་མེད་པ་ལས་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་བ་
མེད་དེ། རྟག་ཏུ་]ཐམས་ཅད་ལས་ཐམས་ཅད་སྐྱེ་བར་ཐལ་བར་
འགྱུར་པའི་ཕྱིར། [དང་། རྩོམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དོན་མེད་པ་ཉིད་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་
རོ། །]ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[That Buddhapālita’s Commentary on (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the
Middle” says this] entails [that Buddhapālita proves the meanings in
Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle, Called “Wisdom”
mainly by way of consequences] because since in [Nāgārjuna’s] root text
there are no more than consequences, the master Buddhapālita does not set
forth other than mainly consequences also in [his] commentary, because
Chandrakīrti’s Clear Words says:a
Objection [by the hypothetical Bhāvavivekab]: It is the custom of
commentators to set forth syllogisms at length.
Answer: That also is not so because when even the master
[Nāgārjuna] commented on [his] Refutation of Objections, he did
not set out syllogistic statements.
At the juncture [where I said] no entailment35 [in response] to [the oppo-
nent’s presenting] a root [consequence], the reason [which is that Bud-
dhapālita is the opener of the chariot-way where (Tsong-kha-pa) says,
“opens the chariot-way,”] is established because Tsong-kha-pa’s The Es-
sence of Eloquence says:c
The translation is from Hopkins, Meditation on Emptiness, 497, and his draft “Where is
the Middle?,” 176, where he translates the same citation in Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Great Ex-
position of the Middle, 225a.
legs ldan ’byed, c. 500-570?.
drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP edition, 81b.3. The translation is from Jeffrey
Hopkins’ draft translation of Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence in the volume titled

Openers of the Chariot-ways 109
In the translations [into Tibetan] of the texts of our own schools
[the determination]—upon having examined whether to assert au-
tonomous [syllogisms] or consequences—that “autonomous [syl-
logisms] are not logically feasible [but] consequences are logi-
cally feasible” does not explicitly occur in texts other than those
of Chandrakīrti and his followers.36
ཁྱབ་སྟེ། རྩ་བར་aཐལ་འགྱུར་ལས་མེད་ པས་འགྲེལ་པར་ཡང་ [14a]
ཐལ་འགྱུར་ལས་གཙོ་བོར་སློབ་དཔོན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཀྱིས་
མ་བཤད་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཚིག་གསལ་ལས། འོན་ཏེ་སྦྱོར་བའི་ངག་རྒྱས་
པར་བརྗོད་པར་བྱེད་པ་འདི་ནི་འགྲེལ་པ་མཁན་པོ་རྣམས་ཀྱི་
ལུགས་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེ་ན། དེ་ཡང་ཡོད་པ་མ་ཡིན་ཏེ། རྩོད་པ་བཟློག་
པའི་འགྲེལ་པ་མཛད་པ་ན་སློབ་དཔོན་གྱིས་སྦྱོར་བའི་ངག་མ་
གསུངས། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། རྩ་བའི་མ་ཁྱབ་མཚམས་ཀྱི་
རྟགས་[ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་ལ། ཞེས་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མཁན་སངས་རྒྱས་
བསྐྱངས་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ་ལས། རང་སྡེའི་
གཞུང་འགྱུར་བ་རྣམས་ལས་ཐལ་རང་གང་འདོད་བརྟགས་ནས་
རང་རྒྱུད་མི་འཐད། ཐལ་འགྱུར་འཐད་ཅེས་པ་ནི་ཟླ་བའི་གཞུང་
རྗེས་འབྲང་དང་བཅས་པ་མིན་པ་ནས་དངོས་སུ་མ་བྱུང་
ངོ་། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
11. About this formulation someone says:b It follows that it is not logi-
cally feasible that Buddhapālita explains by way of consequences because
Emptiness in the Autonomy School in the section on “History of the refutation of autonomy
and others’ system of explaining its meaning,” 139.
The 2015 Go-mang Lhasa (10a.1) has a perpendicular stroke (shad) here, whereas the
2011 TBRC bla brang (13b.6) has a dot, likely seeking not to give the impression that this
is a quotation.
2011 TBRC bla brang, 14a.3; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 10b.4.

110 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Bhāvaviveka asserts that Buddhapālita also asserts autonomous [syllo-
gisms].
བྱས་པ་ལ་ཁོ་ན་རེ། སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཀྱིས་ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་སྒོ་
ནས་བཤད་པ་མི་འཐད་པར་ཐལ། ལེགས་ལྡན་གྱིས་སངས་རྒྱས་
བསྐྱངས་ཡང་རང་རྒྱུད་བཞེད་པར་འདོད་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
Our response: [That Bhāvaviveka asserts that Buddhapālita also asserts
autonomous (syllogisms)] does not entail [that it is not logically feasible
that Buddhapālita explains by way of consequences] because [Bhāva-
viveka says this] in consideration that that since autonomous [syllogisms]
are not manifest [in Buddhapālita’s text],37 even many [unwanted] conse-
quences cannot establish a meaninga because Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence
of Eloquence says:b
Even Bhāvaviveka did not think that he differed from Bud-
dhapālita with respect to asserting or not asserting autonomous
[syllogisms]; his appears to be a system in which it is taken for
granted [that both masters agree] in asserting autonomous [syllo-
gisms]. Because of this essential, he also did not assert that he and
Buddhapālita differed even about the object of negation in the ref-
utation of an inherent nature with respect to phenomena and per-
sons.
This is clear in Khay-drub-ge-leg-pal-sang’s Compilation on Emptiness.c
[ལེགས་ལྡན་གྱིས་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཡང་རང་རྒྱུད་བཞེད་པར་འདོད་ན། སངས་རྒྱས་
བསྐྱངས་ཀྱིས་ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་སྒོ་ནས་བཤད་པ་མི་འཐད་པས་]མ་ཁྱབ་སྟེ། རང་
རྒྱུད་མི་གསལ་བས་ཐལ་འགྱུར་མང་ཡང་དེ་ཙམ་གྱིས་དོན་གྲུབ་
don.
drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP edition, 81b.6-82a.1. The translation is from Jef-
frey Hopkins’ draft “Emptiness in the Consequence School,” 76. Jam-yang-shay-pa cites
only the beginning and end of the passage.
Khay-drub-ge-leg-pal-sang (mkhas grub dge legs dpal bzang, 1385-1438), Opening the
Eyes of the Fortunate: Treatise Brilliantly Clarifying the Profound Emptiness / Compila-
tion on Emptiness (zab mo stong pa nyid rab tu gsal bar byed pa’i bstan bcos skal bzang
mig ’byed / stong thun chen mo), translated into English by José Ignacio Cabezón, A Dose
of Emptiness: An Annotated Translation of the stong thun chen mo of mKhas grub dGe
legs dpal bzang (Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1992), 257ff.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 111
མི་ནུས་པར་དགོངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ་ལས།
ལེགས་ལྡན་ལ་ཡང་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་དང་རང་ཉིད་རང་རྒྱུད་
ཁས་ལེན་མི་ལེན་མི་མཐུན་སྙམ་པ་མི་འདུག་ཅེས་པ་ནས། [གི་རང་
རྒྱུད་ཁས་ལེན་པ་འོས་མེད་དུ་བྱས་པའི་ལུགས་སུ་སྣང་ངོ་། །དེའི་གནད་ཀྱིས་ཀྱང་
[82a]
རང་ཉིད་དང་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་གཉིས་ལ་ཆོས་དང་གང་ཟག་ལ་རང་བཞིན་
འགོག་པའི་]དགག་བྱ་ལ་ཡང་ཁྱད་པར་ཡོད་པར་མི་བཞེད་
དོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། སྟོང་ཐུན་ན་གསལ་པོར་ཡོད།
12. Also, someone says:a It follows that whoever is an opener of the char-
iot-way of the Autonomy Middle Way School is necessarily an opener of
a chariot-way because this is so with respect to the Mind-Only School [that
is, whoever is an opener of the chariot-way of the Mind-Only School is
necessarily an opener of a chariot-way].
ཡང་ཁོ་ན་རེ། རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན་ཤིང་
རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་དགོས་པར་ཐལ། སེམས་ཙམ་པ་ལ་[སེམས་
ཙམ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟེའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་དགོས་པ་]དེའི་
ཕྱིར་ན་
Our response: [That whoever is an opener of the chariot-way of the Mind-
Only School is necessarily an opener of a chariot-way] does not entail [that
whoever is an opener of the chariot-way of the Autonomy Middle Way
School is necessarily an opener of a chariot-way]. If you accept [that who-
ever is an opener of the chariot-way of the Autonomy Middle Way School
is necessarily an opener of a chariot-way], it [absurdly] follows that the
subject, Bhāvaviveka, is an opener of a chariot-way because of being the
opener of the chariot-way of the Sūtra Autonomy Middle Way School.
[Whoever is the opener of the chariot-way of the Sūtra Autonomy Middle
Way School] is necessarily [an opener of a chariot-way] because the way
of the Sūtra Autonomy Middle Way School and the chariot-way of the Au-
tonomy Middle Way School were simultaneously opened. It follows [that
the way of the Sūtra Autonomy Middle Way School and the chariot-way
2011 TBRC bla brang, 14a.6; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 10b.6.

112 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
of the Autonomy Middle Way School were simultaneously opened] be-
cause Bhāvaviveka initially opened the great pathway in which:
the three characters as posited by the Mind-Only School are not the
meaning of the thought of [any] sūtra;
and even though other-powered, thoroughly established, and imputa-
tional phenomena are not truly existent, they are established by way
of their own character,
because Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence says:a
Kamalashīla's Illumination of the Middleb explains in detail this
pathway opened by Bhāvaviveka in which [Bhāvaviveka]c com-
ments that the meaning of the three characters described in the
Sūtra Unraveling the Thought as commented on by the Yogic
Practitioners is not the meaning of [any] sūtra but has a Middle
Way meaning.
[སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟེའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་དགོས་ན།
རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་དགོས་
པས་]མ་ཁྱབ། [རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་
ཡིན་དགོས་པར་]འདོད་ན། སློབ་དཔོན་ལེགས་ལྡན་འབྱེད་ཆོས་ཅན།
[ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་[14b]འབྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]དེར་ཐལ། [རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་
འབྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]དེའི་ཕྱིར། [སློབ་དཔོན་ལེགས་ལྡན་འབྱེད་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]དེར་ཐལ། མདོ་སྡེ་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་
པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [མདོ་སྡེ་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་
རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན། རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་
པས་]ཁྱབ་སྟེ། མདོ་སྡེ་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་སྲོལ་དང་།
drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP edition, 59a.6-59b.1. The translation is from Jef-
frey Hopkins’ draft “Emptiness in the Autonomy School” at the end of the section titled
“How Shāntarakṣhita and Kamalashīla Explain the Meaning of the Sūtra Unraveling The
Thought,” 48.
madhyamakāloka, dbu ma snang ba.
Jig-may-dam-chö-gya-tsho’s Port of Entry, 443.25 (Taipei edition).

Openers of the Chariot-ways 113
དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་གཅིག་ཆར་ཕྱེ་བའི་ཕྱིར།
[མདོ་སྡེ་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་སྲོལ་དང་། དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་
སྲོལ་གཅིག་ཆར་ཕྱེ་བ་]དེར་ཐལ། སེམས་ཙམ་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་གསུམ་
བཞག་པ་ལྟར་མདོའི་དགོངས་དོན་མ་ཡིན་ལ་གཞན་དབང་
ཡོངས་གྲུབ་དང་ཀུན་བཏགས་ཀྱི་ཆོས་རྣམས་བདེན་པར་མེད་
ཀྱང་རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པའི་ལམ་སྲོལ་ཆེན་པོ་ཐོག་
མར་ལེགས་ལྡན་གྱིས་ཕྱེ་བའི་ཕྱིར། ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ་ལས།
དགོངས་འགྲེལ་ལས། མཚན་ཉིད་གསུམ་གསུངས་པའི་དོན། རྣལ་
འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པ་བ་དག་གིས་ཇི་ལྟར་བཀྲལ་བ་མདོའི་དོན་མ་ཡིན་
པར་དབུ་མའི་དོན་དུ་འགྲེལ་བའི་ལམ་སྲོལ་འདི་ནི་ལེགས་ལྡན་
འབྱེད་ཀྱིས་ཕྱེ་བ་ཞིབ་ཏུ་ནི་དབུ་མ་སྣང་བ་ལས་བཤད། ཅེས་
གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
13. Also, someone says:a It follows that the subject, Shāntarakṣhita, is an
opener of the chariot-way of the Middle Way School because of being an
opener of a chariot-way of the Middle Way Autonomy School. It follows
that the subject, Shāntarakṣhita, is an opener of a chariot-way of the Mid-
dle Way Autonomy School because of being an opener of the chariot-way
of the Yogic Practice Middle Way Autonomy School.
ཡང་ཁོ་ན་རེ། སློབ་དཔོན་ཞི་འཚོ་ཆོས་ཅན། དབུ་མ་པའི་ཤིང་
རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པར་ཐལ། དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [སློབ་དཔོན་ཞི་འཚོ་ཆོས་ཅན། དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་
པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]དེར་ཐལ། རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་
མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
2011 TBRC bla brang, 14b.4; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 11a.3.

114 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Our response: [Being an opener of the chariot-way of the Yogic Practice
Middle Way Autonomy School] does not entail [being an opener of a char-
iot-way of the Middle Way Autonomy School]. The reason [which is that
Shāntarakṣhita is an opener of the chariot-way of the Yogic Practice Mid-
dle Way Autonomy School] is established because after Bhāvaviveka
opened the Autonomy School, [Shāntarakṣhita] opened the way of the Au-
tonomy system of a Middle Way School in which external objects do not
exist because Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence says:a
It is good [to take this], in accordance with the master Ye-shay-
day’sb assertion, as that the master Shāntarakṣhita opened the way
of the Middle Way tenet system in the mode of the nonexistence
of external objects in conventional terms.
[རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན། དབུ་མ་
རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པས་]མ་ཁྱབ། [སློབ་དཔོན་ཞི་འཚོ་རྣལ་
འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པ་]རྟགས་གྲུབ་
སྟེ། ལེགས་ལྡན་གྱིས་རང་རྒྱུད་ཕྱེ་བའི་རྗེས་སུ་ཕྱི་དོན་མེད་པའི་
དབུ་མ་པའི་རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་ལུགས་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བའི་ཕྱིར། ལེགས་བཤད་
སྙིང་པོ་ལས། ཐ་སྙད་དུ་ཕྱི་རོལ་མེད་པའི་ཚུལ་གྱི་དབུ་མའི་གྲུབ་
མཐའ་ནི་སློབ་དཔོན་ཞི་བ་འཚོས་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བར་སློབ་དཔོན་ཡེ་
drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP edition, 55a.1-2. The translation is adapted from
Jeffrey Hopkins’ draft “Emptiness in the Autonomy School” in the section titled “How
Shāntarakṣhita and Kamalashīla explain whether external objects exist or not in conven-
tional terms,” 37.
Ye-shay-day’s (ye shes sde, fl. 8th century) Distinctions in the Views (lta ba'i khyad par),
in bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4360), TBRC W23703.206:428-457 (Delhi, India: Delhi Kar-
mapae chodhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985), 213b.2-213b.4:
bar gyi mkhan po śānta rakṣi ta zhes bya bas ā cārya a saṃ gas rnam par shes
pa tsam du bshad pa'i bstan bcos rnal 'byor spyod pa mdzad pa la brten te/ kun
rdzob tu de'i lugs dang mthun par rnam par shes pa tsam du bsgrubs la/ don dam
par rnam par shes pa yang rang bzhin med par bshad pa'i dbu ma'i bstan bcos
dbu ma'i rgyan zhes bya ba zhig mdzad de/ dbu ma'i bstan bcos lugs cung zad mi
mthun pa gnyis byung bas/ ā cārya bha byas mdzad pa la ni mdo sde pa'i dbu
ma zhes btags / ā cārya śānta rakṣi tas mdzad pa la ni rnal 'byor spyod pa'i dbu
ma zhes btags.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 115
ཤེས་སྡེས་བཞེད་པ་ལྟར་ལེགས་སོa། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
14. About this, someone says:b It follows that Shāntarakṣhita is not the
opener of the chariot-way of the Yogic Practice Middle Way Autonomy
School because prior to Shāntarakṣhita, (1) Āryavimuktisena and so forth
explained a Middle Way in which external objects do not exist and (2)
Bhāvaviveka refuted that [Middle Way explained by Āryavimuktisena and
so forth in which external objects do not exist].
དེ་ལ་ཁོ་ ན་རེ། ཞི་འཚོ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་
[15a]
པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མ་ཡིན་པར་ཐལ། ཞི་འཚོའི་སྔོན་ནས་
འཕགས་གྲོལ་སོགས་ཀྱིས་ཕྱི་དོན་མེད་པའི་དབུ་མ་བཤད་ཅིང་།
ལེགས་ལྡན་གྱིས་[འཕགས་གྲོལ་སོགས་ཀྱིས་ཕྱི་དོན་མེད་པའི་དབུ་མ་བཤད་
པ་]དེ་བཀག་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
Our response: [That prior to Shāntarakṣhita, (1) Āryavimuktisena and so
forth explained a Middle Way in which external objects do not exist and
(2) Bhāvaviveka refuted that (Middle Way explained by Āryavimuktisena
and so forth in which external objects do not exist)] does not entail [that
Shāntarakṣhita is not the opener of the chariot-way of the Yogic Practice
Middle Way Autonomy School. The first reason [which is that prior to
Shāntarakṣhita, Āryavimuktisena and so forth explained a Middle Way in
which external objects do not exist] is established because Haribhadra’s
[Clear Meaning] Commentary (see above, 83) says:c
[Included among Superiors (ārya),]
The one called Vimuktisenad also,
Having seen that what theye had done were not done [exactly],
With intelligence dwelling in the middle, also made explanatory
differentiation.38
Correcting ltar lags in 2011 TBRC bla brang (14b.6) to ltar lags so in accordance with
2015 Go-mang Lhasa (11a.5).
2011 TBRC bla brang, 14b.6; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 11a.5.
Stanza 4, Amano edition, 3; Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the last three lines; the first line
is added in brackets for context.
Known as Āryavimuktisena.
Asaṅga and Vasubandhu.

116 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
[ཞི་འཚོའི་སྔོན་ནས་འཕགས་གྲོལ་སོགས་ཀྱིས་ཕྱི་དོན་མེད་པའི་དབུ་མ་བཤད་ཅིང་།
ལེགས་ལྡན་གྱིས་(འཕགས་གྲོལ་སོགས་ཀྱིས་ཕྱི་དོན་མེད་པའི་དབུ་མ་བཤད་པ་)དེ་
བཀག་ན། ཞི་འཚོ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་བའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་མ་
ཡིན་པས་]མ་ཁྱབ། རྟགས་དང་པོ་[ཞི་འཚོའི་སྔོན་ནས་འཕགས་གྲོལ་སོགས་
ཀྱིས་ཕྱི་དོན་མེད་པའི་དབུ་མ་བཤད་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། དེས་བྱས་
བྱས་པ་མིན་མཐོང་ནས། །དབུ་མར་གནས་པའི་བློས་རྣམ་
ཕྱེ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The second part of the reason [which is that prior to Shāntarakṣhita,
Bhāvaviveka refuted that Middle Way explained by Āryavimuktisena and
so forth in which external objects do not exist] is established because prior
to [Shāntarakṣhita, Bhāvaviveka] refuted the explanation by a certain Pro-
ponent of the Middle Way [Āryavimuktisena] that it must be established
first that external objects do not truly exist as in the Mind-Only School and
then afterwards that the mind does not truly exist, because Bhāvaviveka’s
Lamp for (Nāgārjuna’s) “Wisdom:” Commentary on (Nāgārjuna’s)
“Fundamental Treatise on the Middle” says:a
Even if it is asserted that having first taken up cognition-only, one
later thoroughly forsakes it, rather than having dirtied [oneself]
prajñāpradīpamūlamadhyamakavṛtti, dbu ma'i rtsa ba'i 'grel pa shes rab sgron me. The
sde dge edition (dbu ma, tsha, 247a.1-2) reads:
gzhan yang rnam par rig pa nye bar blang ba yang byas nas gal te/ de yongs su
gtong bar yang 'dod na ni 'di ltar 'dam rdzab 'khru bas mi reg par thag bsring
ba bzang ngo // don ngo bo nyid med pa nyid du brtags pa bzhin du rnam par
shes pa yang bdag med pa nyid dang skye ba med pa nyid du rtogs par byar rung
ngo.
Jam-yang-shay-pa is citing the passage directly from Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Elo-
quence (drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP 54b.2-3), which is perhaps his helpful
paraphrase of the passage, reading:
'di la shes rab sgron ma las/ dang po rnam par rig pa tsam blangs nas phyis de
yongs su gtong bar 'dod na yang 'dam rdzab kyis sbags nas 'khru ba las dang po
nas ma reg par thag sring ba bzang ste/ phyi rol gyi don ngo bo nyid med par
rtogs pa bzhin du rnam shes kyang bdag med pa dang skye ba med par rtogs par
byar rung ngo//zhes gsungs te
I have adapted the translation of Tsong-kha-pa’s version from Jeffrey Hopkins’ draft
“Emptiness in the Autonomy School,” 29-30.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 117
with mud and then washing, it would be better from the beginning
not to touch it and maintain distance. Just as one realizes external
objects as natureless, so it would be fitting to realize conscious-
ness also as selfless and not [ultimately] produced.
[That Bhāvaviveka’s Lamp says this] entails [that prior to (Shāntarakṣhita,
Bhāvaviveka) refuted the explanation by a certain Proponent of the Middle
Way (Āryavimuktisena) that it must be established first that external ob-
jects do not truly exist as in the Mind-Only School and then afterwards
that the mind does not truly exist] because even though Avalokitavrata as-
serts that the opponent is a proponent of the Mind-Only School, the oppo-
nent is a certain Proponent of the Middle Way because Tsong-kha-pa’s The
Essence of Eloquence says:a
It is evident that he is refuting the assertion by a certain Proponent
of the Middle Way that trainees definitely must be taught in such
an order.
རྟགས་ཟུར་གཉིས་པ་[ལེགས་ལྡན་གྱིས་(འཕགས་གྲོལ་སོགས་
ཀྱིས་ཕྱི་དོན་མེད་པའི་དབུ་མ་བཤད་པ་)དེ་བཀག་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ།
[ཞི་འཚོ་]དེའི་སྔོན་ནས་དབུ་མ་པ་ཁ་ཅིག དང་པོ་སེམས་ཙམ་པ་
ལྟར་ཕྱི་དོན་བདེན་མེད་དང་། དེ་ནས་སེམས་བདེན་མེད་རྗེས་སུ་
སྒྲུབ་དགོས་པར་བཤད་པ་བཀག་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཤེས་རབ་སྒྲོན་མེ་ལས།
དང་པོ་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་ཙམ་བླངས་ནས་ཕྱིས་དེ་ཡོངས་སུ་
གཏོང་བར་འདོད་ན་ཡང་། ཞེས་པ་ནས།[འདམ་རྫབ་ཀྱིས་སྦགས་ནས་
འཁྲུ་བ་ལས་དང་པོ་ནས་མ་རེག་པར་ཐག་སྲིང་བ་བཟང་སྟེ། ཕྱི་རོལ་གྱི་དོན་ངོ་བོ་ཉིད་
མེད་པར་རྟོགས་པ་བཞིན་དུ་]རྣམ་ཤེས་ཀྱང་བདེན་མེད་དང་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་
པར་རྟོགས་པར་བྱ་བར་རུང་ངོ་། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཁྱབ་སྟེ།
ཕྱོགས་སྔ་འདི་སྤྱན་རས་གཟིགས་བརྟུལ་ཞུགས་ཀྱིས་སེམས་ཙམ་
པ་ལ་འདོད་ཀྱང་དབུ་མ་པ་ཁ་ཅིག་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། ལེགས་བཤད་
drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP edition 54b5-6. The translation is Jeffrey Hopkins’
draft “Emptiness in the Autonomy School.”

118 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
སྙིང་པོ་ལས། དབུ་མ་པ་ཁ་ཅིག་གདུལ་བྱ་ལ་རིམ་པ་དེ་ལྟར་ངེས་
པར་སྟོན་དགོས་ཞེས་འདོད་པ་འགོག་པར་མངོན་ནོ། །ཞེས་
གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
You cannot accept the root [consequence that Shāntarakṣhita is not the
opener of the chariot-way of the Yogic Practice Middle Way Autonomy
School] because even though prior to him, [that is, Shāntarakṣhita,] there
were a fewa such systems [asserting the nonexistence of external objects],
without developingb as a great traditionc they were not suitable to be a
chariot-way, just as, for example, when there is a small path, it is not suit-
able to assign it as a roadway for a chariot,39 because Tsong-kha-pa’s The
Essence of Eloquence says:d
Therefore, even though such a system also arose [prior to Shānta-
rakṣhita] in merely a minor way, [it is good—in accordance with
the master Ye-shay-day’se assertion—(to take it) that the master
Shāntarakṣhita opened the way of] the Middle Way tenet system
upon extensively composing texts in the mode of the nonexistence
of external objects in conventional terms.
རྩ་བར་[ཞི་འཚོ་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་
མ་ཡིན་པར་]འདོད་མི་ནུས་ཏེ། [ཞི་འཚོ་]དེའི་སྔ་རོལ་[ཕྱི་དོན་མེད་པར་
འདོད་པ་]དེ་འདྲ་བའི་ལུགས་རེ་གཉིས་ཡོད་ཀྱང་སྲོལ་ཆེན་པོ་མ་
བཏོད་པ་ལ་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་མི་རུང་བའི་ཕྱིར། དཔེར་ན། ལམ་ཆུང་
ངུ་ཡོད་ཀྱང་ཤིང་རྟ་ཆེན་པོའི་འགྲོ་ལམ་དུ་མི་འཇོག་པ་བཞིན་
ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ་ལས། དེས་ན་འདི་འདྲ་བའི་
re gnyis.
btod pa
srol chen po
drang nges legs bshad snying po, ACIP edition, 55a.1-2. The translation is from Jeffrey
Hopkins’ draft “Emptiness in the Autonomy School,” in the section titled “How Shānta-
rakṣhita and Kamalashīla explain whether external objects exist or not in conventional
terms,” 37; the bracketed material is from Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence cited
above, 114.
ye shes sde.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 119
ལུགས་ཀྱང་རེ་རེ་ཙམ་བྱུང་མོད་ཀྱང་གཞུང་ རྒྱས་པར་ [15b]
བརྩམས་ནས་ཐ་སྙད་དུ་ཕྱི་རོལ་མེད་པའི་ཚུལ་གྱི་དབུ་མའི་གྲུབ་
མཐའ་ནི། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
Hence, there are many upholders of the way also of the Yogic Practice
Middle Way School because the Foremost Precious [Tsong-kha-pa] asserts
that:
Proponents of the Middle Way School resembling [Mind-Only] True
Aspectarians are, for instance, Shāntarakṣhita, Kamalashīla, and Dhar-
makīrti;
Proponents of the Middle Way Autonomy School resembling [Mind-
Only] Tainted False Aspectarians are, for instance, the two,
Haribhadra and Jetāri;
and a Proponent of the Middle Way Autonomy School in agreement
with [Mind-Only] Untainted False Aspectarians is, for instance, Kam-
bala.
དེས་ན་རྣལ་འབྱོར་སྤྱོད་པའི་དབུ་མ་པའི་ཡང་སྲོལ་འཛིན་དུ་མ་
ཡོད་དེ། རྣམ་བདེན་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་དབུ་མ་པ་ནི་ཞི་འཚོ་དང་ཀ་མ་ལ་
ཤཱི་ལ་དང་ཆོས་གྲགས་ལྟ་བུ། རྣམ་རྫུན་དྲི་བཅས་ལྟ་བུའི་དབུ་མ་
རང་རྒྱུད་པ་སློབ་དཔོན་སེང་བཟང་དང་ཛེ་ཏཱ་རི་གཉིས་ལྟ་བུ་
དང་། རྣམ་རྫུན་དྲི་མེད་དང་མཐུན་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པ་ལྭ་
བ་པ་ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན་པ་རྗེ་རིན་པོ་ཆེས་བཞེད་པའི་ཕྱིར།
The first [reason which is that Proponents of the Middle Way School re-
sembling (Mind-Only) True Aspectarians are, for instance, Shāntarakṣhita,
Kamalashīla, and Dharmakīrti] is established because Advayavajra’sa Ten
Stanzas on Suchness says:b
Karl Brunnhölzl identifies Advayavajra as Maitrīpāda in Straight from the Heart (Ithaca:
Snow Lion, 2007), 177, “Maitrīpa took the name Advayavajra.” He gives his dates as 1007-
1085.
tattvadaśaka, 1ab, edited by Haraprasad Shastri in Advayavarjasaṃgraha, Gaekwad’s
Oriental Series 40 (Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1927), 49:
na sākāranirākāre tathatāṃ jñātum icchataḥ

120 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Those wanting to know suchness
Should not do so in the manner of Aspectarians or Non-Aspec-
tarians.40
and the great scholar (paṇ chen, mahāpaṇḍita) Sahajavajra’s Commentary
on (Advayavajra’s) “Ten Stanzas on Suchness” says:a
The exalted presence Shāntarakṣhita and so on assert the Aspected
Middle Way; [Shāntarakṣhita] says:
These things we and others propound
Do not inherently exist
Because of being devoid of inherent existence
As one or many, like a reflection.
and so on, with Sahajavajra citing the entirety (yongs rdzogs)b of Shānta-
rakṣhita’s Ornament for the Middle,c because Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence
of Eloquence says:d
De kho na nyid bcu pa, sde dge, rgyud, wi, 113a.1; P3080, vol. 68 275.3.1. Sahajavajra’s
Commentary (identified in the next note) identifies the main meaning of “aspected” as the
Aspected Middle Way School (rnam pa dang bcas pa’i dbu ma) and “nonaspected” as the
Nonaspected Middle Way School (rnam pa med pa’i dbu ma).
Sahajavajra’s Commentary on (Advayavajra’s) “Ten Stanzas on Suchness” (tattvadaśa-
kaṭīkā, de kho na nyid bcu pa'i rgya cher 'grel pa), sde dge, rgyud, wi, 164b.5-6; P3099,
vol. 68, 297.4.6ff. Karl Brunnhölzl has translated this work into English in Straight from
the Heart, 192-252.
In detailing the system of the Aspected Middle Way asserted by Shāntarakṣhita and so
forth Sahajavajra cites from among the 97 stanzas of Shāntarakṣhita’s Ornament for the
Middle (madhyamakālaṃkārakārikā, dbu ma rgyan gyi tshig le'ur byas pa; sde dge, dbu
ma, sa, 53a.1-2) the first stanza and then skips to 61-66, 69, 70, 84, and 91-93. Thus, Jam-
yang-shay-pa’s “entirety” (yongs rdzogs) likely means “an impressive amount,” not the
entire treatise.
madhyamakālaṃkārakārikā (Masamichi Ichigō edition), 1:
niḥsvabhāvā ami bhāvas tattvataḥ svaparoditaḥ / ekānekasvabhāvena viyogāt
pratibimbavat
Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the first line from the translation of Sahajavajra’s commentary
(de kho na nyid bcu pa'i rgya cher 'grel pa, sde dge, rgyud, wi, 164b.5), bdag dang gzhan
smras dngos po yis. The translation bdag dang gzhan smra'i dngos 'di dag at dbu ma rgyan
gyi tshig le'ur byas pa (sde dge, dbu ma, sa, 53a.1) is superior.
legs bshad snying po, ACIP 56a.6. The translation is from Jeffrey Hopkins’ draft “Emp-
tiness in the Autonomy School,” in the section titled “How Shāntarakṣhita and Kamalashīla
explain whether external objects exist or not in conventional terms,” 42. Jam-yang-shay-
pa cites this passage in his Great Exposition of Tenets; for it and Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s
extensive explanation, see Hopkins, Maps of the Profound, 765-769.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 121
This system [the Yogic Practice Middle Way Autonomy School]
asserts that the aspects of blue, yellow, and so on are effective
things;a it also comments on Dharmakīrti’s assertion in this way;
hence, it is a Middle Way School that in conventional terms makes
assertions in accordance with True Aspectarians.
དང་པོ་[རྣམ་བདེན་པ་ལྟ་བུའི་དབུ་མ་པ་ནི་ཞི་འཚོ་དང་ཀ་མ་ལ་ཤཱི་ལ་དང་ཆོས་
གྲགས་ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ་པ་ལས། དེ་བཞིན་ཉིད་ནི་
ཤེས་འདོད་པས། །རྣམ་བཅས་མ་ཡིན་རྣམ་མེད་མིན། །ཞེས་དང་།
པཎ་ཆེན་ལྷན་སྐྱེས་རྡོ་རྗེའི་འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། ཞི་བ་འཚོའི་ཞལ་སྔ་
ནས་ལ་སོགས་པ་རྣམ་པ་དང་བཅས་པའི་དབུ་མ་ཉིད་ཁས་ལེན་
པར་བྱེད་དེ། དེ་སྐད་དུ། བདག་དང་གཞན་སྨྲས་དངོས་པོ་
ཡིས། །ཞེས་སོགས་དབུ་མ་རྒྱན་ཡོངས་རྫོགས་དྲངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ་ལས། ལུགས་འདིས་སྔོ་སེར་ལ་སོགས་པའི་
རྣམ་པ་དངོས་པོར་འདོད་དེ་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པའི་བཞེད་པ་ཡང་
དེ་ལྟར་འགྲེལ་པས་ཐ་སྙད་དུ་རྣམ་བདེན་པ་ལྟར་འདོད་པའི་
དབུ་མ་པའོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
There is entailment41 because [this system, the Yogic Practice Middle Way
Autonomy School,] asserts that blue, yellow, and so on—factors that are
objects of experience by direct realizations of themb—are real convention-
alitiesc established in accordance with how they appear,42 because Shānta-
rakṣhita’s Ornament for the Middle says:d
dngos po.
mngon sum du rtogs pa'i myong bya'i cha.
yang dag kun rdzob, tathyasaṃvṛti/samyaksaṃvṛti.
madhyamakālaṃkārakārikā (Masamichi Ichigō edition) 64bcd; dbu ma rgyan gyi tshig
le'ur byas pa, sde dge, dbu ma, sa, 55a.6. Masamichi Ichigō (213) translates the entire
stanza:
One should understand that conventional (truth) is in essence (1) that which is
agreeable and tacitly accepted only as long as it is not investigated critically
(avicāryaikaramaṇīya); (2) that which is characterized by arising and decay; and

122 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Realize that these having the attribute of production and disinte-
gration,
Are [real] conventionalities having a nature
Of being able to perform functions.
and his Autocommentary to the “Ornament for the Middle” says:a
These conventionalities are not in their nature just mere verbal
conventions; they are things that are seen and accepted.43
ཁྱབ་སྟེ། སྔོ་སེར་སོགས་རང་མངོན་སུམ་དུ་རྟོགས་པའི་མྱོང་བྱའི་
ཆ་སྣང་བ་ལྟར་དུ་གྲུབ་པའི་ཡང་དག་ཀུན་རྫོབ་ཏུ་འདོད་པའི་
ཕྱིར། དབུ་མ་རྒྱན་ལས། སྐྱེ་དང་འཇིག་པའི་ཆོས་ཅན་པ། །དོན་
བྱེད་པ་དག་ནུས་རྣམས་ཀྱི། །རང་བཞིན་ཀུན་རྫོབ་པ་ཡིན་
རྟོགས། །ཞེས་དང་། དེའི་རང་འགྲེལ་ལས། ཀུན་རྫོབ་འདི་ནི་སྒྲའི་
ཐ་སྙད་ཙམ་གྱི་bབདག་ཉིད་མ་ཡིན་གྱི། མཐོང་བ་དང་འདོད་
པའི་ དངོས་པོ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[16a]
The second [reason which is that Proponents of the Middle Way Au-
tonomy School resembling [Mind-Only] Tainted False Aspectarians are,
for instance, the two, Haribhadra and Jetāri] is established because
Haribhadra’s [Clear Meaning] Commentary44 says:c
A mere cognition that has the character of the aspect of the appre-
hender is also eliminated, […]nondual[…]45
and Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence says:d
A mere cognition—apprehending unmistakenly—that has the
character of the aspect of the apprehender is also eliminated.
གཉིས་པ་[རྣམ་རྫུན་དྲི་བཅས་ལྟ་བུའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པ་སློབ་དཔོན་སེང་བཟང་
(3) whatever has causal efficiency.
madhyamakālaṃkāravṛtti, dbu ma rgyan gyi 'grel pa; sde dge, dbu ma, sa, 70b7.
Correcting tha snyad tsam gyis in 2015 Go-mang Lhasa (12a.2) to tha snyad tsam gyi in
accordance with 2011 TBRC bla brang (15b.6).
Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary on Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Reali-
zations, Amano edition, 90: tām api lakṣaṇāṃ vijñaptimātratām avadhūyādvaya-jñānam.
kha, 287a.3-4. See the previous endnote for a lengthier citation.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 123
དང་ཛེ་ཏཱ་རི་གཉིས་ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། འཛིན་པའི་
རྣམ་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་ཙམ་དེ་ཡང་བསལ་ཏེ་
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་པའི། ཞེས་དང་། རྣམ་བཤད་ལས། འཛིན་པའི་
མཚན་ཉིད་རྣམ་པར་རིག་པ་མ་འཁྲུལ་བར་འཛིན་པ་ཙམ་དེ་
ཡང་བསལ་ཏེ། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་།
and because Jetāri’sa [Auto]commentary on “Differentiating the Sugata’s
Texts” says:b
His name is also given as Jitāri; Jam-yang-shay-pa here transliterates the Sanskrit je tā ri.
Both Jitāri and Jetāri are dgra las rgyal ba in Tibetan.
This quotation is a tiny bit of the beginning and the end of a passage, with an unmarked
long ellipsis, from Jetāri’s [Auto]commentary on “Differentiating the Sugata’s Texts”
(sugatamatavibhaṅgabhāṣya, bde bar gshegs pa'i gzhung rnam par 'byed pa'i bshad pa;
sde dge, dbu ma, ’a, 64b.3-65a.3); here is the entire passage with the portions cited by Jam-
yang-shay-pa in bold:
’di las kyang dbu ma pa yin te/
sna tshogs snang can don rnams la //
gal te gcig nyid mi rigs na //
re zhig gcig bu'i blo de nyid //
sna tshogs su ni ji ltar snang //
zhes phyogs snga ma bslang ba sngon du 'gro bas /
ji lta ji ltar don bsams la [ce, 126b, pa] //
de lta de ltar rnam dben [ce, 126b, 'brel] zhes //
mkhas pa rnams ni [ce, 126b, kyis] gang gsung ba //
de ni dngos stobs 'ongs pa yin //
sna tshogs gcig na ci zhig 'gyur [ce, 126b, gcig la sna tshogs de cir 'gyur] //
blo de la ni mi 'gyur ro //
gal te don 'gal 'di 'dod na //
de la kho bo ci zhig yin // [ce, 126b, gal te don rnams bdag nyid 'dir //
'dod na de la ngas ci bya]
zhes gsungs pa'o //
rnam par shes pa'i skabs nyid nas //
gang gis dngos po rnam dpyad nas //
de nyid du na de dngos med //
gang gi phyir na de dag la //
gcig dang du ma'i rang bzhin med //
ces bya ba 'di las kyang yin te // phyi rol dang nang thun mong du sun 'byin pa

124 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
[You can know that Dharmakīrti] is a Proponent of the Middle
Way also from this [passage in Dharmakīrti’s Commentary on࿈
(Dignāga’s) “Compilation of Prime Cognition” which begins]:a
[If oneness is not reasonable]
In objects appearing variously,
[…and concludes] This suchness of the Middle Way illuminated
by the holy Superior Nāgārjuna and asserted by the holy master
yin no // dbu ma pa'i lugs kyi bdud rtsi la dgyes pa mi mnga' na ni // de skad
gsungs pa rigs par ma mthong ngo // gang la
rigs lam srang zhugs 'gro ba ni //
gcig tu byas dang bdag gi blo //
'on kyang yongs su rtogs pa ni //
skal ldan yod na de rnams rgyal //
zhes bya ba'i seng ge'i sgra yod cing // gang zhig shes rab phul du byung ba dang
ldan pas lha'i bla ma rgyang ring du smad cing bcom ldan 'das 'phags pa 'jam
dpal dang mtshungs so // gang la //
bsngags pa 'thob pa rnams lta ba ngan pa'i g.yang sa chen por lhung ba'i sems
can la thugs brtse bas rje btsun kun tu bzang po gshegs par bsngags pa brjod pa
/ kha na ma tho ba med pa'i gsang sngags kyis mu stegs ngan pa'i sha za skrag
par mdzad pa tshad ma pa'i tshogs kyi gtsug gi nor bu ste / dbu ma pa'i grub
mtha' la rgyab kyis phyogs pa yin no
zhes bya ba 'di la blo dang ldan pa su zhig yid ches par 'gyur / de lta na bcom
ldan 'das kyis lung las khong du chud cing tshad mas yongs su dag la / 'phags
pa klu sgrub kyi zhal snga nas gsal bar mdzad pa / slob dpon chos kyi grags
pa'i zhal snga nas bzhed pa'i dbu ma de kho na 'di blo dang ldan pa rnams kyis
khas blang ba dang / goms par bya bar 'os pa yin te.
Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the first line of the first stanza that begins a complex argu-
ment; this first stanza is:
If it is not reasonable that objects
Appearing variously are a unity,
How then does this single awareness
Appear variously?
pramāṇavarttika, pratyakṣaparivarta, mngon sum le'u, 208:
citrāvabhāseṣvartheṣu yadyekatvaṁ na yujyate | saiva tāvat kathaṁ buddhirekā
citrāvabhāsinī
tshad ma rnam 'grel gyi tshig le'ur byas pa; sde dge, tshad ma, ce, 126b.1:
sna tshogs snang can don rnams la // gal te gcig nyid mi rigs na // re zhig gcig
pu'i blo de nyid // sna tshogs su ni ci ltar snang //
The entire argument is given in Tibetan in the previous footnote; see also the commentary
in Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s Annotations, TBRC W5926-3831, note zha.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 125
Dharmakīrti[…].a
There is entailment,46 because he cites and explains a False Aspectarian
passage in Dharmakīrti’s Commentary on (Dignāga’s) “Compilation of
Prime Cognition,” and he explains that even though defilements do not
Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only part of Jetāri’s concluding remark, sufficient to make the
point that the reality asserted by Dharmakīrti is the same as that illuminated by Nāgārjuna.
The complete remark is:
Thus, this suchness of the Middle Way—understood from the scriptures of the
Supramundane Victor, thoroughly certified by valid cognition, illuminated by
the holy Superior Nāgārjuna, and asserted by the holy master Dharmakīrti—is
suitable to be asserted and to be cultivated by the intelligent.
Jeffrey Hopkins, in “Synopsis of Chapter 9: Maitreya’s Middle and Extremes and
Other Scholars” in his Emptiness in the Mind-Only School, 337, in a detailed analysis of
stanza 4 from Dharmakīrti’s Commentary on (Dignāga’s) “Compilation of Prime Cogni-
tion” chapter three (pratyakṣa):
If all are without capacity,
The capacity of sprouts and so forth is seen in seeds and so forth.
That is asserted conventionally.
How? Let it be so!
aśaktaṃ sarvam iti ced bījāder aṅkurādiṣu | dṛṣṭā śaktiḥ matā sā cet saṃvṛtyāstu
yathā tathā (gal te thams cad nus med na // sa bon sogs ni myug sogs la // nus
mthong gal te de kun rdzob // 'dod na ci ste de ltar 'gyur)
conveys the essential reason why Jam-yang-shay-pa characterizes Jetāri’s analysis of Dhar-
makīrti as a Middle Way Autonomy Tainted False Aspectarian. Jetāri cites stanza 4 from
Dharmakīrti immediately before the passage Jam-yang-shay-pa cites here. Hopkins, draw-
ing from the exposition by Ngag-wang-pal-dan, says:
In the second reading, Dharmakīrti is taken to be not a Proponent of Mind-Only
but a Proponent of Non-Nature. An impressive lineup of Indian scholars—the
eighth-century Ravigupta, the eighth-century Shāntarakṣhita and his spiritual son
Kamalashīla, the ninth or tenth-century Prajñākaragupta, as well as Jetāri and so
forth—identify Dharmakīrti’s stanza in this fashion. They attribute the first line
to Dharmakīrti himself as a Proponent of Non-Nature; the second line to the op-
ponent; the third line to Dharmakīrti; and the final to the opponent.
According to the second reading, the stanza is:
[A Proponent of Non-Nature such as Dharmakīrti] says: All are [ultimately]
without the capacity [to perform functions].
[Response by a Proponent of True Existence:] The capacity [to produce]
sprouts and so forth is seen in seeds and so forth.
[The Proponent of Non-Nature, for example, Dharmakīrti, responds:] This is
asserted conventionally.
[Response by a Proponent of True Existence:] How? Let it be so!

126 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
permeatea the nature of the mind, afflictive emotions polluteb the entity of
consciousness in accordance with Asaṅga’s Summary of the Great Vehi-
cle:c
It is asserted as pure like the purity
Of the water constituent, gold, and space.
ཛེ་ཏཱ་རིའི་བདེ་གཤེགས་གཞུང་གི་རང་འགྲེལ་ལས། འདི་ལས་
ཀྱང་དབུ་མ་པ་ཡིན་ཏེ། སྣ་ཚོགས་སྣང་ཅན་དོན་རྣམས་ལ།d
[…]འཕགས་པ་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་ཀྱི་ཞལ་སྔ་ནས་གསལ་བར་མཛད་པ་སློབ་
དཔོན་ཆོས་ཀྱི་གྲགས་པའི་ཞལ་སྔ་ནས་བཞེད་པའི་དབུ་མའི་དེ་
ཁོ་ན་ཉིད་འདི། ཞེས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཁྱབ་སྟེ། རྣམ་རྫུན་པའི་
རྣམ་འགྲེལ་གྱི་ལུང་དྲངས་ནས་བཤད་ལ། ཐེག་བསྡུས་ལས། ཆུ་
ཁམས་གསེར་དང་ནམ་མཁའ་བཞིན། །དག་པ་བཞིན་དུ་དག་
པར་འདོད། །ཅེས་པ་ལྟར། དྲི་མ་སེམས་ཀྱི་རང་བཞིན་ལ་མ་
ཞུགས་ཀྱང་ཤེས་པའི་ངོ་བོ་ཉོན་མོངས་ཀྱིས་བསླད་པར་བཤད་
པའི་ཕྱིར།
The third reason [which is that a Proponent of the Middle Way Auton-
omy School in agreement with (Mind-Only) Untainted False Aspectarians
is, for instance, Kambala] is established because Sahajavajra’s Commen-
tary on (Advayavajra’s) “Ten Stanzas on Suchness” cites a passage from
zhugs
bslad
This couplet is not from Asaṅga’s Summary of the Great Vehicle (mahāyānasaṃgraha,
theg pa chen po bsdus pa) but from Maitreya’s Differentiation of the Middle and the Ex-
tremes, I.16 (madhyāntavibhāgakārikā, dbu dang mtha' rnam par 'byed pa tshigs su byas
pa, sde dge, sems tsam, phi, 41a.3). In Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Great Exposition of Tenets he
similarly mistakenly says that these two lines appear in both Maitreya’s Sublime Contin-
uum and Asaṅga’s Summary of the Great Vehicle (see Hopkins, Maps of the Profound,
769); the more likely meaning is that similar statements occur in these texts.
2015 Go-mang Lhasa (12a.5) reads don rnams las; 2011 TBRC bla brang (16a.2) reads
don rnams la.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 127
the Nine Modes of the Perfection of Wisdom composed by Kambala:a
The Unaspected Middle Way also is asserted by One Having a
Woolen Blanket for Clothing [that is, Kambala] and so on; he
says:48
Defilements produced from the substantial cause
Obscure the indivisible entity.
[An awareness like a lump of crystal
Appears in another format.
(When) the wise (examine) just how it is
These appear dualistically.
Because the mental aspect is mistaken,
Apprehended-object and apprehending-subject are differ-
ent.
…
The aspect of magical illusion causes mistake—
A factual elephant and appearance as that
For the wise do not exist as effective things.]
Above at first mention, his name is given variously depending on the edition, lwa ba ba
(2011 TRBC bla brang 1bb.2) and lwa ba pa (2015 Go-mang Lhasa 12b.1); now here it is
evocatively lwa ba'i na bza' can meaning “one who has a woolen blanket for clothing”
(2011 TRBC bla brang 16a.5 and 2015 Go-mang Lhasa 12a.7), and then lwa ba ba (2011
TRBC bla brang 16a.5) but lwa ba pa (2015 Go-mang Lhasa 12b.1); the extract cited be-
low from Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence similarly evinces this variation, lwa
ba ba (2011 TRBC bla brang 16a.6) but lwa ba pa (2015 Go-mang Lhasa 12b.2). The three
times when the final ba appears in the bla brang edition is likely due to the Am-do penchant
for replacing pa with ba. The ACIP edition of Tsong-kha-pa’s text (drang ba dang nges
pa’i don rnam par phye ba’i bstan bcos legs bshad snying po, 56b.1) reads lwa ba pa.
Brunnhölzl gives his name as Kambala and Kambalāmbara. The extract cited in our text is
not in sde dge edition of the Tibetan translation of Kambala’s Nine Modes of the Perfection
of Wisdom/ Nine Stanza Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom (bhagavatī
prajñāpāramitānavaślokapiṇḍārtha, bcom ldan 'das ma shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i
don bsdus pa'i tshigs su bcad pa dgu pa; sde dge, shes phyin, ma, 1b.1-2b.3) or his
[Auto]commentary (ṭīkā, rgya cher 'grel pa; sde dge, shes phyin, ma, 2a-6a). A similar
passage appears in Kambala’s Garland of Lights (ālokamālāprakaraṇa, snang ba'i phreng
ba zhes bya ba'i rab tu byed pa; sde dge, dbu ma, ha, 52a.3-4: lhag pa'i dri ma skyes pa
yis // rang gi ngo bo nges rtogs bsgribs. Brunnhölzl, Straight from the Heart, 366-367,
renders the stanza into English:
With their insight into themselves
Obscured by stains born from clinging,
Minds appear in the form of something other,
Just as crystals do.

128 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
and so forth.
རྟགས་གསུམ་པ་[རྣམ་རྫུན་དྲི་མེད་དང་མཐུན་པའི་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པ་ལྭ་བ་པ་
ལྟ་བུ་ཡིན་པ་]གྲུབ་སྟེ། དེ་ཉིད་བཅུ་པའི་འགྲེལ་པ་ལས། རྣམ་པ་མེད་
པའི་དབུ་མ་ཡང་ལྭ་བའི་ན་བཟའ་ཅན་ལ་སོགས་པས་ཁས་ལེན་
ཏེ། དེ་སྐད་དུ་དེ་ཡིས། ཉེར་ལེན་ལས་སྐྱེས་དྲི་མ་ཡིས། །བདག་
ཉིད་དབྱེར་མེད་པ་བསྒྲིབ་སྟེ། །བློ་ནི་ཤེལ་སྒོང་རྣམ་པ་
ལྟར། །[གཞན་གྱི་གཟུགས་སུ་སྣང་བ་ཡིན། །ཇི་ལྟར་ཤིན་ཏུ་མཁས་པ་ཡིས། །དེ་ལྟར་
འདི་ཉིད་གཉིས་སུ་སྣང་། །སེམས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ་འཁྲུལ་བའི་ཕྱིར། །གཟུང་དང་འཛིན་པ་ཐ་
དད་དོ་ཞེས་པ་ནས། །སྒྱུ་མའི་རྣམ་པ་འཁྲུལ་བྱེད་དེ། །གླང་ཆེན་དོན་དང་དེར་སྣང་
བ། །མཁས་པ་ལ་ནི་དེ་དངོས་མེད། །]ཞེས་སོགས་ལྭ་བ་པས་མཛད་པའི་
ཕར་ཕྱིན་ཚུལ་དགུ་པའི་ལུང་དྲངས་པའི་ཕྱིར།
[This statement] entails [that a Proponent of the Middle Way Autonomy
School in agreement with (Mind-Only) Untainted False Aspectarians is,
for instance, Kambala] because Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence
says:a
The paṇḍita Sahajavajra explains that Proponents of the Middle
who in conventional terms assert, in accordance with False Aspec-
tarians, that the aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth do not exist
as effective things are as commented upon by the master Kambala.
and because Kambala’s Nine Modes of the Perfection of Wisdom cited [in
Sahajavajra’s Commentary on (Advayavajra’s) “Ten Stanzas on Such-
ness”] also says:b
drang ba dang nges pa’i don rnam par phye ba’i bstan bcos legs bshad snying po, ACIP,
56b.1-2. The translation is from Hopkins’ draft translation in “Emptiness in the Autonomy
School” at the end of the section titled “How Shāntarakṣhita and Kamalashīla explain
whether external objects exist or not in conventional terms.”
tattvadaśakaṭīkā, de kho na nyid bcu pa'i rgya cher 'grel pa; sde dge rgyud, wi, 165b.1.
This extract is contained in the ellipsis in the citation above; see Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s
commentary in the footnote there. As above, the passage is not in the Tibetan translation
of Kambala’s Nine Modes of the Perfection of Wisdom, but again a similar passage appears
in his Garland of Lights (ālokamālāprakaraṇa, snang ba'i phreng ba zhes bya ba'i rab tu
byed pa; sde dge, dbu ma, ha, 52a.4-5: sems ni rnam par bslad pa'i phyir // gcig nyid gnyis

Openers of the Chariot-ways 129
Because the mental aspect is mistaken,
Apprehended-object and apprehending-subject are different.
ཁྱབ་སྟེ། ལེགས་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ་ལས། ཐ་སྙད་དུ་སྔོ་སེར་ལ་སོགས་
པའི་རྣམ་པ་རྣམས་དངོས་པོར་མེད་པ་རྣམ་རྫུན་པ་ལྟར་འདོད་
པའི་དབུ་མ་པ་ནི་སློབ་དཔོན་ལྭ་བ་པས་བཀྲལ་བ་ལྟར་ཡིན་
ནོ། །ཞེས་པཎྚི་ཏ་ལྷན་ཅིག་སྐྱེས་པའི་རྡོ་རྗེས་ བཤད་དོ། །ཞེས་ [16b]
གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་a། ཚུལ་དགུ་པ་དྲངས་པ་ལས་ཀྱང་།
སེམས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་པ་འཁྲུལ་བའི་ཕྱིར། །གཟུང་དང་འཛིན་པ་ཐ་དད་
དོ། །ཞེས་སོགས་གསུངས་པའི་ཕྱིར། །
OUR OWN SYSTEM
རང་ལུགས་ལ།
Someone having the aspect of a Bodhisattva Superior who comments
well on the thought of the Victor’s high sayings without depending an-
other commentator having the fleshly shape of a human is the defini-
tion of an opener of a chariot-way.
There are three of those [openers of chariot-ways] because, as already
established through scripture and reasoning, there are the three:
concerning the openers of a chariot-way of the Middle Way there are
two—the opener of the chariot-way of the explicit teaching of empti-
ness, Nāgārjuna, and the composer of the Ornament [for the Clear
Realizations] who commented on the hidden meaning as the eight cat-
egories of clear realizations, [Maitreya]
and the master Asaṅga who commented on the meaning of the Mother
[Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras] as Mind-Only.
Also, openers of chariot-ways having a human basis who differentiate the
interpretable and definitive among the Victor’s high sayings are limited to
two because those are limited to the two––the masters Nāgārjuna and
su snang ba yin // gzung dang 'dzin pa'i dbye ba la // shin tu mkhas pa cis ma yin.
2011 TBRC bla brang (16b.1) reads phyir dang; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa (12b.2) reads
phyir.

130 Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis
Asaṅga.
མིའི་ཤ་ཚུགས་ཅན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་བྱེད་གཞན་ལ་མ་བརྟེན་པར་རྒྱལ་
བའི་གསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་དགོངས་པ་ལེགས་པར་འགྲེལ་བའི་བྱང་
འཕགས་ཀྱི་རྣམ་ཅན་དེ་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་མཚན་ཉིད།
[ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་]དེ་ལ་གསུམ་ཡོད་དེ། དབུ་མ་པའི་ཤིང་རྟའི་
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ལ་དངོས་བསྟན་སྟོང་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་
དང་། སྦས་དོན་མངོན་རྟོགས་དངོས་པོ་བརྒྱད་དུ་འགྲེལ་བའི་
རྒྱན་རྩོམ་པ་པོ་གཉིས་ཡོད་ལ། ཡུམ་གྱི་མདོའ་ི དོན་སེམས་ཙམ་དུ་
འགྲེལ་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན་ཐོགས་མེད་གསུམ་ཡོད་པར་ལུང་རིགས་
ཀྱིས་སྒྲུབ་ཟིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཡང་རྒྱལ་བའི་གསུང་རབ་ཀྱི་དྲང་ངེས་
འབྱེད་པའི་མིའི་རྟེན་ཅན་གྱི་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ལ་གཉིས་སུ་
ངེས་ཏེ། དེ་ལ་སློབ་དཔོན་ཀླུ་སྒྲུབ་དང་ཐོགས་མེད་གཉིས་སུ་ངེས་
པའི་ཕྱིར།
DISPELLING OBJECTIONS
རྩོད་སྤོང་ལ་
15. Someone says:a It follows that Maitreya’s Treatise on the Later Scrip-
tures of the Great Vehicle is a treatise that opens a chariot-way because the
author of the Ornament [for the Clear Realizations] is the opener of a
chariot-way. [That the author of the Ornament for the Clear Realizations
is an opener of a chariot-way] extremely does not entail [that Maitreya’s
Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle is a treatise that opens
a chariot-way] because even though [the author of the Ornament for the
Clear Realizations] is an opener of a chariot-way, whatsoever treatises that
[the author of the Ornament for the Clear Realizations] has composed do
2011 TBRC bla brang, 18b.5; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa, 14b.2. Because of its relevance this
debate has been moved here for the sake of this publication.

Openers of the Chariot-ways 131
not need to create the opening of a chariot-way, and because his mode of
opening a chariot-way is to comment on the hidden meaning—all the se-
quence of the clear realizations—as the eight categories, whereby the Or-
nament for the Clear Realizations is a treatise that opens a chariot-way.
The reason [which is that the Ornament for the Clear Realizations is a
treatise that opens a chariot-way] has already been established.
ཁོ་ན་རེ། རྒྱུད་བླ་མ་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས་ཡིན་
པར་ཐལ། རྒྱན་རྩོམ་པ་པོ་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་ན་
[རྒྱན་རྩོམ་པ་པོ་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ན། རྒྱུད་བླ་མ་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་
བསྟན་བཅོས་ཡིན་པས་]ཤིན་ཏུ་མ་ཁྱབ་སྟེ། [རྒྱན་རྩོམ་པ་པོ་]དེ་ཤིང་རྟའི་
སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཡིན་ཀྱང་[རྒྱན་རྩོམ་པ་པོ་]དེའི་བསྟན་བཅོས་གང་
བརྩམས་ཀྱིས་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་པར་བྱེད་aམི་དགོས་པའི་ཕྱིར་
དང་། [རྒྱན་རྩོམ་པ་པོ་]དེས་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་ཚུལ་སྦས་དོན་མངོན་
རྟོགས་ཀྱི་རིམ་པ་ཀུན་དངོས་པོ་བརྒྱད་དུ་འགྲེལ་བ་དེ་ཡིན་པས་
མངོན་ རྟོགས་རྒྱན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས་
[19a]
ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། [མངོན་རྟོགས་རྒྱན་ཤིང་རྟའི་སྲོལ་འབྱེད་ཀྱི་བསྟན་བཅོས་ཡིན་
པའི་]རྟགས་སྒྲུབ་ཟིན།
2011 TBRC bla brang (18b.6) reads srol ’byed par byed; 2015 Go-mang Lhasa (12b.3)
reads srol ’byed.

Bibliography of Works Cited
Sūtras and Tantras are listed alphabetically by English title in the first sec-
tion. Indian and Tibetan treatises are listed alphabetically by author in the
second and third sections; other works are listed alphabetically by author
in the fourth section. Works mentioned in the first three sections are often
not repeated in the fourth section.
1. Sūtras and Tantras
Advice to King Bimbisāra Sūtra
rājadeśanāmamahāyānasūtra/ āryarājāvavādakasūtra
rgyal po la gdams pa'i mdo/ rgyal po la gdams pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 214). TBRC W22084.62:415-421.
Bases of Monastic Discipline
vinayavastu
’dul ba gzhi
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 1). TBRC W22084.1:3-623. (PDF
Bodhisattva Scriptural Collection
bodhisattvapiṭakasūtra
byang chub sems dpaʼi sde snod kyi mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bkaʼ ʼgyur (sde dge par phud, 56). TBRC W22084.41:3-414.
Buddhāvataṃsaka Sūtra
Buddhāvataṃsakanāmamahāvaipūlyasūtra
sangs rgyas phal po che zhes bya ba shin tu rgyas pa chen po’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 44). TBRC W22084.35:4-787
Peking 761, vols. 25-26.
Buddhas of the Fortunate Eon Sūtra
āryabhadrakalpikanāmamahāyānasūtra/bhadrakalpikasūtra
’phags pa bskal pa bzang po pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo/ mdo sde bskal bzang
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 94). TBRC W22084.45:3-681.
Descent into Laṅkā Sūtra
laṅkāvatārasūtra
lang kar gshegs pa’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 107). TBRC W22084.49:113-384
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 775, vol. 29
Sanskrit: Bunyiu Nanjio. Bibl. Otaniensis, vol. 1. Kyoto: Otani University Press, 1923. Also: P.
L. Vaidya. Saddharmalaṅkāvatārasūtram. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 3. Darbhanga, India:
Mithila Institute, 1963.
English translation: D. T. Suzuki. The Lankavatara Sutra. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul,
1932.

134 Bibliography of Works Cited
Diamond Cutter Sūtra
prajñāpāramitā vajracchedikā
sher rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa rdo rje bcod pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 19). TBRC W22084.34:243-266
Peking 739, vol. 21
Sanskrit edition: Paul Harrison and Shōgo Watanabe. “Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā.” In Bud-
dhist Manuscripts Vol. 3: Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection. Eds. Jens Braavig et al
Oslo: Hermes Publishing, 2006. Available from Bibliotheca Polyglotta ed.
http://www2.hf.uio.no/polyglotta/index.php?page=fulltext&view=fulltext&vid=22
Sanskrit: P. L. Vaidya. Aṣṭasāhasrika Prajñāpāramitā, with Haribhadra’s Commentary called
Ālokā. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 4. Darbhanga, India: Mithila Institute, 1960.
English translation: Edward Conze. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines & Its
Verse Summary. Bolinas, Calif.: Four Seasons Foundation, 1973.
English translation. Paul Harrison. “Vajracchedikā Prajñāpāramitā. A New English Translation of
the Sanskrit Text Based on Two Manuscripts from Greater Gandhāra.” In Buddhist Manu-
scripts Vol. 3: Manuscripts in the Schøyen Collection. Eds. Jens Braavig et al Oslo: Hermes
Publishing, 2006.
Eight Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra / Eight Thousand
aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa bryad stong pa.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 12). TBRC W22084.33:3-573
Peking 734, vol. 21
Sanskrit: In U. Wogihara. Abhisamayālaṃkārālokā Prajñāpāramitā Vyākhyā, The Work of
Haribhadra. Tokyo: The Toyo Bunko, 1932-5; reprint ed., Tokyo: Sankibo Buddhist Book
Store, 1973. Also P.L.Vaidya. Ed. Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā. Buddhist Sanskrit Text
Series, 4. Darbhanga: Mithila Institute, 1960; online at Digital Sanskrit Buddhist Canon.
aṣṭasāhasrikā prajñāpāramitā. http://www.dsbcproject.org/node/8242. Also Rajendra Lala
Mitra. Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, Bibliotheca Indica, no. 110, Calcutta: Baptist Mission
Press, 1888.
Sanskrit: P. L. Vaidya. Aṣṭasāhasrika Prajñāpāramitā, with Haribhadra’s Commentary called
Ālokā. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 4. Darbhanga, India: Mithila Institute, 1960.
English translation: Edward Conze. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines & Its
Verse Summary. Bolinas, Calif.: Four Seasons Foundation, 1973.
Eighteen Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra / Eighteen Thousand
aṣṭādaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā.
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa khri bryad stong pa.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 10). TBRC W22084.29:3-601.
Edward Conze. The Prajñā-pāramitā Literature. 'S-Gravenhage: Mouton and Co., 1960; 2nd ed.,
Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1979.
Sanskrit of the first chapters: Stefano Zacchetti. In Praise of the Light. Bibliotheca Philologica et
Philosophica Buddhica, Vol. 8. The International Research Institute for Advanced Buddhol-
ogy. Tokyo: Soka University, 2005. Sanskrit of the later chapters: Edward Conze. Ed. The
Gilgit Manuscript of the Aṣṭādaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā. Roma: Is.M.E.O, 1962.
English translation of parts in Edward Conze. The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1975.
Golden Light Sūtra
suvarṇaprabhāsasūtra/suvarṇaprabhāsottamasūtrendrarājanāmamahāyānasūtra

Bibliography of Works Cited 135
gser 'od mchog tu rnam par rgyal ba'i mdo/ 'phags pa gser 'od dam pa mdo sde'i dbang po'i rgyal
po zhes bya ba theg pa chen po'i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 555). TBRC W22084.89:39-303.
Heap of Jewels Sūtra
mahāratnakūṭdharmaparyāyaśatasāhasrikagranthasūtra
dkon mchog brtsegs pa chen po’i chos kyi rnam grangs stong phrag brgya pa
Peking 760, vols. 22–24.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 45). TBRC W22084, vols 39-44
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, gyalwae sun-grab partun khang, 1982-
Heart of Wisdom Sūtra
bhagavatīprajñāpāramitāhṛdaya
bcom ldan 'das ma shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i snying po
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 100). TBRC W22084.34:290-293
Kālachakra Tantra
kālacakranāmatantrarāja
rgyud kyi rgyal po dpal dus kyi ’khor lo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 362). TBRC W22084.77:46-258.
Sanskrit edition: Kālacakra-Tantra And Other Texts, Ed. Prof. Dr. Raghu Vira and Prof. Dr.
Lokesh Chandra, Part 1. New Delhi: International Academy of Indian Culture, 1966
English translation (chapter 1): John Newman. The Outer Wheel of Time: Vajrayāna Buddhist
Cosmology in the Kālacakra Tantra. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms International,
1987.
English translation and Mongolian text (chapter 2): Vesna Acimovic Wallace. The Inner
Kālacakratantra: A Buddhist Tantric View of the Individual. 2 vols. PhD diss., University of
California at Berkeley, 1995; and Kālacakratantra: The Chapter on the Individual together
with the Vimalaprabhā. New York: American Institute of Buddhist Studies, 2004.
Peking 4, vols. 1
Long Play / Extensive Sport Sūtra
lalitavistaranāmamahāyānasūtra
mdo rgya cher rol pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 95). TBRC W22084.46:3-434
Peking 763, vol. 27
Sanskrit: P. L Vaidya, The Mithila Institute of Post-Graduate Studies and Research in Sanskrit
Learning, Darbhanga, 1958; available from Digital Buddhist Sanskrit Canon
http://www.dsbcproject.org/node/6443.
Matrix of the One-Gone-Thus Sūtra
āryatathāgatagarbhagarbhanāmamahāyānasūtra/thāgatagarbhasūtra
’phags pa de bzhin gshegs pa’i snying po zhes bya ba’i theg pa chen po’i mdo/ de bzhin gshegs
pa’i snying po'i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 258). TBRC W22084.66:492-520
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae chodhey gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1976-1979)..
Sanskrit fragments, Tibetan, Chinese and English translation. The tathāgatagarbhasūtra, Biblio-
theca Polyglotta https://www2.hf.uio.no/polyglotta/index.php?page= volume&vid=53 based on Mi-
chael Zimmerman, A Buddha Within: The tathāgatagarbhagarbhasūtra, The Earliest Expo-

136 Bibliography of Works Cited
sition of the Buddha-nature Teaching in India. Bibliotheca philologica et philosophica bud-
dhica vol. 6. Tokyo: The International research Institute for Advanced Buddhology, Soka
University, 2002.
One Hundred Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra
śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag brgya pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 8). TBRC W22084.14:3-789 (PDF
of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae chodhey gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1976-1979).
Peking 730, vols. 12-18.
Condensed English translation: Edward Conze. The Large Sūtra on Perfect Wisdom. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1975.
Edward Conze. The Prajñā-pāramitā Literature. 'S-Gravenhage: Mouton and Co., 1960; 2nd ed.,
Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1979.
English translation of parts in Edward Conze, Trans. The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom. Berke-
ley: University of California Press, 1975.
French translation from the Chinese of parts of opening sections in Étienne Lamotte. Le Traité de
la Grande Vertu de Sagesse de Nāgārjuna (Mahāprajñā-pāramitā-śāstra). Vol. I and II: Bib-
liothèque du Muséon, 18. Louvain: Institut Orientaliste, 1949; reprinted 1967. Vol III, IV and
V: Publications de l'Institut Orientaliste de Louvain, 2, 12 and 24. Louvain: Institut Oriental-
iste, 1970, 1976 and 1980.
English translation of Étienne Lamotte's French: Gelongma Karma Migme Chodron. The Treatise
on the Great Virtue of Wisdom of Nāgārjuna. Gampo Abbey Nova Scotia, 2001.
Prophecy of Maitreya Sūtra
āryamaitreyavyākaraṇa
’phags pa byams pa lung bstan pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (snar thang, 329). TBRC W22703.74. (PDF of snar
thang: snar thang dgon pa, 18th cent.).
Questions of King Dhāraṇīṣhvara Sūtra / Sūtra Teaching the Great Compassion of a One Gone Thus
āryatathāgatamahākaruṇānirdeśasūtra
de bzhin gshegs pa’i snying rje chen po bstan pa’i mdo / ’phags pa gzungs kyi dbang phyug rgyal
pos zhus pa’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (lha sa, 148). TBRC W26071.57:310-641 (PDF of
Lhasa: zhol bka’ ’gyur par khang, [194-]).
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 147). TBRC W22084.57:285-486
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae chodhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 814, vol. 32
Questions of Suvikrāntavikrāmin: an Exposition of the Perfection of Wisdom
āryasuvikāntavikrāmiparipṛcchāprajñāpāramitānirdeśa
’phags pa rab rtsal gyis rnam par gnon pas zhus pa/ shes rab kyi pha rol phyin pa bstan pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 147). TBRC W22084.34:41-208
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae chodhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Sanskrit: In Mahāyānasūtrasaṃgraha Part I. Ed. P.L Vaidya, The Mithila Institute of Post-Grad-
uate Studies and Research in Sanskrit Learning Darbhanga 1961; avialable from Digital
Sanskrit Buddhist Canon http://www.dsbcproject.org/node/6435
English translation: Edward, “The Questions of Suvikrāntavikrāmin” in The Short Prajñāpāramitā
Texts, London: Luzac and Co., 1973, pp. 1-78
Shrīmālādevī Sūtra
śrīmālādevīsiṃhanādasūtra
lha mo dpal ’phreng gi seng ge’i sgra’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 92). TBRC W22084.44:511-556
Peking 760.48, vol. 24.

Bibliography of Works Cited 137
English translation: Alex Wayman and Hideko Wayman. The Lion’s Roar of Queen Śrīmālā: A
Buddhist Scripture on the Tathāgatagarbha Theory. New York: Columbia University Press,
1974.
Space Matrix Sūtra
ākāśagarbhasūtra
nam mkha’i snying po’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 260). TBRC W22084.66:529-568
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae chodhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Sūtra on the Heavily Adorned
ārya-ghanavyūha-nāma-mahāyāna-sūtra
rgyan stug po bkod pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 110). TBRC W22084.50:3-112.
Sūtra on the Ten Grounds
daśabhūmikasūtra
mdo sde sa bcu pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In nges don mdo skor. TBRC W22275.6:208-389 (PDF of sDe dGe
dGon Chen: sde dge par khang, 2000).
Peking 761.31, vol. 25
Sanskrit: Daśabhūmikasūtram. P. L. Vaidya, ed. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 7. Darbhanga: Mithila
Institute, 1967.
English translation: M. Honda. “An Annotated Translation of the ‘Daśabhūmika.’” In D. Sinor,
ed, Studies in South, East and Central Asia, Śatapitaka Series 74. New Delhi: International
Academy of Indian Culture, 1968, 115-276.
Sūtra Showing the Inconceivable Mysteries of the One Gone Thus
tathāgatācintyaguhyanirdeśasūtra
de bzhin gshegs pa'i gsang ba bsam gyis mi khyab pa bstan pa'i mdo.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 47). TBRC W22084.39:201-407
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae chodhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Sūtra Unraveling the Thought
saṃdhinirmocanasūtra
dgongs pa nges par ’grel pa’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 106). TBRC W22084; mdo sde,
ca, 49:1b1-55b7 (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun
khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 774, vol. 29; sde dge 106; Dharma, vol. 18; The Tog Palace Edition of the Tibetan Kanjur,
vol. 63, 1-160 (Leh: Smanrtsis Shesrig Dpemzod, 1975-1978)
Tibetan text and French translation: Étienne Lamotte. Saṃdhinirmocanasūtra: L’explication des
mystères. Louvain: Université de Louvain, 1935.
English translation: C. John Powers. Wisdom of Buddha: Saªdhinirmocana Sūtra. Berkeley:
Dharma, 1995. Also: Thomas Cleary. Buddhist Yoga: A Comprehensive Course. Boston:
Shambhala, 1995.
Turning the Wheel of Doctrine Sūtra
dharmacakrapravartanasūtra
chos kyi ’khor lo rab tu bskor ba’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 31). TBRC W22084.34:362-367.
English translation from Pāli in Carolyn A. Davids and Frank Lee Woodward, The Book of Kin-
dred Sayings (Saṁyutta-nikāya) or Grouped Suttas. London: Oxford University Press
(PTSTS 16); repr. 1980.
Twenty-f ive Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra
pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā

138 Bibliography of Works Cited
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 9). TBRC W22084.28:3-763
Peking 731, vol. 19.
English translation (abridged): Edward Conze. The Large Sūtra on the Perfection of Wisdom.
Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975.
2 in Edward Conze. The Prajñā-pāramitā Literature. 'S-Gravenhage: Mouton and Co., 1960; 2nd
ed., Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1979.
Sanskrit of the first abhisamaya of Haribhadra’s revised version: Nalinaksha Dutt. Ed.
Pañcaviṃśati-sāhasrikā Prajñā-pāramitā. Edited with critical notes and introduction. Cal-
cutta Oriental Series, 28. London: Luzac, 1934. The Sanskrit and Tibetan of the remaining
abhisamayas: Edward Conze. Ed. Ms. Cambridge Add. 1628 with various additions. Photo-
copy of typed manuscript. No date, no place. The Sanskrit of the second and third sections of
the version by Haribhadra are available online from http://gretil.sub.uni-goettin-
gen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/4_rellit/buddh/psp_2-3r.txt. This is a digitalized version of the Pan-
cavimsatisahasrika Prajnaparamita,based on the edition by Takayasu Kimura:
Pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā II-III. Tokyo: Sankibo Busshorin, 1986.d
English translation of parts in Edward Conze, The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1975.
Stanza Summary of the Perfection of Wisdom / Stanza Summary of the Eight Thousand Line Perfection
of Wisdom Sūtra
prajñāpāramitāsañcayagāthā/bhagavadprajñāpāramitāratnaguṇasaṃcayagāthā/
ratnaguṇasaṃcayagāthā
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa sdud pa tshigs su bcad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 13). TBRC W22084.34:3-40.
Sanskrit and Tibetan: Akira Yuyama. Prajñā-pāramitā-ratna-guṇa-saṃcaya-gāthā (Sanskrit Re-
cension A): Edited with an Introduction, Bibliographical Notes and a Tibetan Version from
Tunhuang. London: Cambridge University Press, 1976.
Sanskrit: E. E. Obermiller. Prajñāpāramitā-ratnaguṇa-sañcayagāthā. Osnabrück, Germany: Bib-
lio Verlag, 1970. Also: P. L. Vaidya. Mahāyāna-sūtra-saṃgraha. Part I. Buddhist Sanskrit
Texts, 17. Darbhanga, India: Mithila Institute, 1961.
English translation: Edward Conze. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines & Its
Stanza Summary. Bolinas, Calif.: Four Seasons Foundation, 1973.
Teachings of Akṣhayamati Sūtra
akṣayamatinirdeśa
blo gros mi zad pas bstan pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 175). TBRC W22084.60:159-350
Peking 842, vol. 34.
Teaching of Vimalak rti S tra
vimalakīrtinirdeśasūtra
’phags pa dri ma med par grags pas bstan pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 176). TBRC W22084.60. (PDF
of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae chodhey gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1976-1979).
Sanskrit and Tibetan: Study Group on Buddhist Sanskrit Litterature. Vimalakīrtinirdeśa: Trans-
literated Sanskrit Text Collated with Tibetan and Chinese Translations. Tokyo: The Institute
for Comprehensive Studies of Buddhism, Taisho University, 2004. Available online at Bibli-
othecaPolyglotta:https://www2.hf.uio.no/polyglotta/index.php?page=vol-
ume&bid=2&vid=37&entity=37&kid=37
English translation. Boin, Sara A. The Teaching of Vimalakīrti. Boston: Routledge, 1976. being
a translation of Lamotte, Étienne, L'Enseignement de Vimalakīrti. Louvain: Publications Uni-

Bibliography of Works Cited 139
versitaires, Inst. Orientaliste, 1962. Also available online at Bibliotheca Poly-
glotta:https://www2.hf.uio.no/polyglotta/index.php?page=volume&bid=2&vid=37&en-
tity=37&kid=37; also Thurman, Robert Alexander Farrar. The Holy Teaching of Vimalakīrti.
University Park: Pennsylvania University Press, 1976.
White Lotus of Excellent Doctrine Sūtra
dam pa’i chos pad ma dkar po zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo
saddharmapuṇḍarīka
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’gyur (sde dge par phud, 113). TBRC W22084 103 vols
Sanskrit: Hendrik Kern and Bunyiu Nanjio. Saddharmapuṇḍarika. Bibliotheca Buddhica 10. St.
Petersburg, 1908-1912; repr. Osnabriick: Biblio Verlag, 1970.
English translation: Hendrik Kern. The Saddharma-puṇḍarīka, or Lotus of the True Law. Oxford:
Clarendon, 1884. Sacred Books of the East 21; repr. New York: Dover, 1963; Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1965. Also, Leon Hurvitz. Scripture of the Lotus Blossom of the Fine Dharma.
New York: Columbia University Press, 1976.
2. Works by Indian Authors
Abhayākaragupta (’jigs med ’byung gnas sbas pa, d. 1140)
Commentary on the “Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”: Moonlight of Essential
Points
aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāvṛttimarmakaumudī
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa'i ’grel pa gnad kyi zla ’od
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3805). TBRC W23703.90:4-457 (PDF of
Peking 5202, vol. 92.
Ornament to the Subduer’s Thought
munimatālaṃkāra
thub pa’i dgongs rgyan
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3903). TBRC W23703. 109: 148 – 587
457 (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-
Peking 5294
Advayavajra / Maitripa (gnyis su med paʼi rdo rje, 1007-1085)
Ten Principles / Ten Stanzas on True Reality
tattvadaśaka
de kho na nyid bcu pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 2236). BRC W23703.51:226-227. (PDF
Sanskrit: “Tattvadaśaka.” Edited by Haraprasad Shastri in Advayavarjasaṃgraha, Gaekwad's
Oriental Series 40, Baroda: Oriental Institute, 1927, p. 49.
English translation: Karl Brunnhölzl, “Sahajavajra's Commentary on 'Ten Stanzas on True Re-
ality,” in Straight From the Heart, Ithaca: Snow Lion, 2007, pp.140-141.
Anon. (Attributed to Nāgārjuna in AIBS database)
Totally Fearless.
mūlamadhyamakavṛttyakutobhaya/akutobhaya.
dbu ma rtsa baʼi ʼgrel pa ga las ʼjigs med.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3829) TBRC W23703.96:60-199. (PDF
Tibetan: Max von Walleser, ed. Ga las hjigs med; die tibetsiche Version von Nāgārjuna’s Kom-
mentar Akutobhayā zur Madhyamaka-kārikā, nach der Pekinger Ausg. des Tanjur hrsg.. Hei-
delberg and Leipzig: O. Harrassowitz, 1923.

140 Bibliography of Works Cited
Āryadeva (’phags pa lha, second to third century C.E.)
Four Hundred / Treatise of Four Hundred Stanzas
catuḥśatakaśāstrakārikā
bstan bcos bzhi brgya pa zhes bya ba’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3846). TBRC W23703.97:3-37 (PDF of
Peking 5246, vol. 95.
Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit fragments and English translation: Karen Lang. Āryadeva’s Ca-
tuḥśataka: On the Bodhisattva’s Cultivation of Merit and Knowledge. Indiske Studier, 7. Co-
penhagen: Akademisk Forlag, 1986.
English translation: Geshe Sonam Rinchen and Ruth Sonam. Yogic Deeds of Bodhisattvas: Gyel-
tshap on Āryadeva’s Four Hundred. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1994.
Italian translation of the last half from the Chinese: Giuseppe Tucci. “Studi Mahāyānici: La ver-
sione cinese del Catuḥśataka di Āryadeva, confronta col testo sanscrito e la traduzione tibet-
ana.” Rivista degli Studi Orientali 10 (1925): 521-567.
Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit fragments along with English translation: Karen Lang. Āryadeva’s
Catuḥśataka: On the Bodhisattva’s Cultivation of Merit and Knowledge. Indiste Studier, 7.
Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag, 1986.
English translation: Geshe Sonam Rinchen and Ruth Sonam. Yogic Deeds of Bodhisattvas: Gyel-
tsap on Āryadeva’s Four Hundred. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 1994.
Āryaśūra
Compendium of the Perfections
pāramitāsamāsa
pha rol tu phyin pa bsdus pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4025). TBRC W23703.111:436-471.
Sanskrit, Tibetan, English translation: Naoki Saito. Das Kompendium der moralischen vollkom-
menheiten: Vairocanarakṣitas tibetische übertragung von Āryaśūras Pāramitāsamāsa samt
neuausgabe des sanskrittextes. Marburg: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 2005.
Āryavimuktisena (’phags pa rnam grol sde, ca. 6th century C.E.)
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the ‘Superior Twenty-Five
Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra’: Ornament for the Clear Realizations”
pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstrābhisamayālaṃkāravṛtti
’phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi shu lnga paʼi man ngag gi bstan bcos
mngon par rtogs paʼi rgyan gyi ’grel pa / nyi khri snang ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3787). TBRC W23703.80:29-425 (PDF
Peking 5185, vol. 88
Sanskrit edition: L'Abhisamayālamkāravrtti di Ārya-Vimuktisena: primo Abhisamaya / testo e
note critiche [a cura di] Corrado Pensa. Roma, Italy: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo
Oriente, 1967; the remaining abhisamayas available from Sanskrit manuscript, Nepal-German
Ms. Preservation Project, Reel no. A37/9.
English translation: Gareth Sparham. Abhisamayālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā, Vols. 1-4.
Fremont, Calif.: Jain Publishing Company, 2006-2011.
Asaṅga (thogs med, fourth century)
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Sublime Continuum of the Great Vehicle” / Explanation of (Mait-
reya’s) “Sublime Continuum of the Great Vehicle”
mahāyānottaratantraśāstravyākhya
theg pa chen po’i rgyud bla ma’i bstan bcos kyi rnam par bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4025). TBRC W23703.123:150-259

Bibliography of Works Cited 141
Peking 5526, vol. 108
Sanskrit: E. H. Johnston (and T. Chowdhury). The Ratnagotravibhāga Mahāyānottaratantra-
śāstra. Patna, India: Bihar Research Society, 1950.
English translation: E. Obermiller. “Sublime Science of the Great Vehicle to Salvation.” Acta
Orientalia 9 (1931): 81-306. Also: J. Takasaki. A Study on the Ratnagotravibhāga. Rome:
Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1966.
Five Treatises on the Grounds
1. Grounds of Yogic Practice
yogācārabhūmi
rnal ’byor spyod pa’i sa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4035). TBRC W23703.127:4-567 (PDF
Peking 5536-5538, vols. 109-110.
Compendium of Synonyms
paryāyasaṃgrahaṇī
rnam grangs bsdu ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4041). TBRC W23703.132:46-96 (PDF
Grounds of Bodhisattvas
bodhisattvabhūmi
byang chub sems pa’i sa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4037). TBRC W23703.129:4-427. (PDF
Peking 5538, vol. 110.
Sanskrit: Unrai Wogihara. Bodhisattvabhūmi: A Statement of the Whole Course of the Bodhi-
sattva (Being the Fifteenth Section of Yogācārabhūmi). Leipzig: 1908; Tokyo: Seigo
Kenyūkai, 1930-1936. Also: Nalinaksha Dutt. Bodhisattvabhumi (Being the XVth Section of
Asangapada’s Yogacarabhumi). Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series 7. Patna, India: K. P.
Jayaswal Research Institute, 1966.
English translation of the Chapter on Suchness, the fourth chapter of Part I which is the f ifteenth
volume of the Grounds of Yogic Practice: Janice D. Willis. On Knowing Reality: The Tattvār-
tha Chapter of Asaṅga’s Bodhisattvabhūmi. New York: Columbia University Press, 1979;
reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1982.
Grounds of Hearers
nyan sa
śrāvakabhūmi
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4036). TBRC W23703.128:4-391 (PDF
Peking 5537, vol. 110.
Sanskrit: Karunesha Shukla. Śrāvakabhūmi. Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series 14. Patna, In-
dia: K. P. Jayaswal Research Institute, 1973.
2. Compendium of Ascertainments
nirṇayasaṃgraha / viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī
rnam par gtan la dbab pa bsdu ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan 'gyur (sde dge, 4038). TBRC W23703.130:4-579 (PDF
Peking 5539, vols. 110-111.
3. Compendium of Bases
vastusaṃgraha
gzhi bsdu ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4039). TBRC W23703.131:255-671

142 Bibliography of Works Cited
Peking 5540, vol. 111.
4. Compendium of Enumerations
paryāyasaṃgraha
rnam grang bsdu ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4041). TBRC W23703. 132: 46 – 96
Peking 5542, vol. 111.
5. Compendium of Explanations
vivaraṇasaṃgraha
rnam par bshad pa bsdu ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4042). TBRC W23703.132:96-128 (PDF
Peking 5259, vol. 96-97; Peking 5543, vol. 111.
Two Summaries
1. Summary of Manifest Knowledge
abhidharmasamuccaya
chos mngon pa kun btus
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4049). TBRC W23703.134:89-241 (PDF
Peking 5550, vol. 112.
Sanskrit: Pralhad Pradhan. Abhidharma Samuccaya of Asaṅga. Visva-Bharati Series 12. Santin-
iketan, India: Visva-Bharati (Santiniketan Press), 1950.
French translation: Walpola Rahula. La Compendium de la super-doctrine (philosophie) (Abhi-
dharmasamuccaya) d’Asaṅga. Paris: École Franḍaise d’Extrême-Orient, 1971.
2. Summary of the Great Vehicle
mahāyānasaṃgraha
theg pa chen po bsdus pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4048). TBRC W23703.134:4-87 (PDF of
Peking 5549, vol. 112.
French translation and Chinese and Tibetan texts: Étienne Lamotte. La Somme du grand véhicule
d’Asaṅga, 2 vols. Publications de l’Institute Orientaliste de Louvain 8. Louvain: Université
de Louvain, 1938; reprint, 1973.
English translation: John P. Keenan. The Summary of the Great Vehicle by Bodhisattva Asaṅga:
Translated from the Chinese of Paramārtha. Berkeley, Calif.: Numata Center for Buddhist
Translation and Research, 1992.
English translation from the French: Gelongma Karma Migme Chodron, Mahāyānasaṃgraha
(La Somme du Grand Véhicule d'Asaṅga) by Étienne Lamotte. Volume II. Translation and
Commentary. Also from the Chinese: John P. Keenan. The Summary of the Great Vehicle by
Bodhisattva Asaṅga: Translated from the Chinese of Paramārtha. Berkeley, Calif.: Numata
Center for Buddhist Translation and Research, 1992.
Asvabhāva (ngo bo nyid med pa)
Extensive Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras”
mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāraṭīkā
theg pa chen po'i mdo sde'i rgyan gyi rgya cher bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4029). TBRC W23703.124:78-349. (PDF
Connected Explanation of (Asaṅga’s) “Summary of the Great Vehicle
mahāyānasaṃgrahopanibandhana
theg pa chen po bsdus pa'i bshad sbyar
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4051). TBRC W23703.134:382-593.

Bibliography of Works Cited 143
Atisha (dīpaṃkaraśrījñāna, mar me mdzad ye shes, 982-1054)
Lamp Summary of (Maitreya’s) “Perfection of Wisdom”
prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārthapradīpa
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i don bsdus sgron ma
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3804). TBRC W23703.89:462-481 (PDF
Peking 5201, vol. 92.
Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment
bodhipathapradīpa
byang chub lam gyi sgron ma
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3947). TBRC W23703.111:477-483
Peking 5343, vol. 103.
English translation with Atisha’s autocommentary: Richard Sherbourne, S.J. A Lamp for the
Path and Commentary. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1983.
English translation: Atisha’s Lamp for the Path: An Oral Teaching by Geshe Sonam Rinchen.
Trans. and ed. Ruth Sonam. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1997.
Bhadanta Vimuktisena (btsun pa rnam grol sde)
[Sub]commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the ‘Superior
Twenty-Five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra’: Ornament for the Clear Realiza-
tions”
āryapañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstrābhisamayālaṃkārakārikāvārttika
nyi khrid nam ’grel / ’phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa’i
man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi tshig le’ur byas pa’i rnam par ’grel pa
In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3788). TBRC W23703.81 (PDF of Delhi, India: Karmapae choedhey,
Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
P5186, vol. 88
Bhāvaviveka (legs ldan ’byed, c. 500-570?)
Blaze of Reasoning / Commentary on the “Heart of the Middle Way”: Blaze of Reasoning
madhyamakahṛdayavṛttitarkajvālā
dbu ma’i snying po’i ’grel pa rtog ge ’bar ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3856). TBRC W23703.98:82-660. (PDF
Peking 5256, vol. 96.
Partial English translation (chap. 3, 1-136): Shotaro Iida. Reason and Emptiness. Tokyo: Hokus-
eido, 1980.
Lamp for Nāgārjuna’s “Wisdom,” Commentary on the “Treatise on the Middle”
prajñāpradīpa
shes rab sgron ma
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3856). TBRC W23703. 97: 92 - 520.
Toh. 3853, dbu ma, vol. tsha
Heart of the Middle Way
madhyamakahṛdayakārikā
dbu ma’i snying po’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3855). TBRC W23703.98:4-82 (PDF of
Peking 5255, vol. 96.
Partial English translation (chap. 3. 1-136): Shōtarō Iida. Reason and Emptiness. Tokyo: Hokus-
eido, 1980.

144 Bibliography of Works Cited
Partial Sanskrit and Tibetan edition (chaps. 1-3): Annette L. Heitmann. Textkritischer Beitrag zu
Bhavyas Madhyamakahṛdayakārikā Kapitel 1-3. Copenhagen: Videnskabsbutikkens Forlag,
Kobenhavns Universitet, 1998.
Bodhibhadra
Connected Explanation of (Āryadeva's) “Compilation of the Essence of Knowledge”
jñānasārasamuccayanāmanibandhana
ye shes snying po kun las btus pa zhes bya ba'i bshad sbyar
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3852). TBRC W23703.97:57-92. (PDF
Buddhapālita (sangs rgyas bskyangs, c. 470-540?)
Buddhapālita Commentary on (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”
buddhapālitamūlamadhyamakavṛtti
dbu ma rtsa ba’i ’grel pa buddha pā li ta
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3842). TBRC W23703.96:318-563 (PDF
Peking 5254, vol. 95.
Edited Tibetan (Ch.1-12): Max Walleser. Bibliotheca Buddhica 16. Osnabrück: Biblio Verlag,
1970.
English translation of Ch.1: Judit Fehér. “Buddhapālita’s Mūlamadhyamakavṛtti—Arrival and
Spread of Prāsaṇgika-Mādhyamika Literature in Tibet.” In Tibetan and Buddhist Studies
Commemorating the 200th Anniversary of the Birth of Alexander Csoma de Kūros, vol. 1,
edited by Louis Ligeti, 211-240. Budapest: Akadmiai Kiado, 1984.
Tibetan edition and English translation of Ch.18: Christian Lindtner. “Buddhapālita on Empti-
ness.” Indo-Iranian Journal 23 (1981): 187-217.
Edited Tibetan (Ch.1-12): Max Walleser. Bibliotheca Buddhica 16. Osnabrück: Biblio Verlag,
1970.
Annotated translation and edited Tibetan text: Akira Saito, “A Study of the Buddhapālita-
mūlamadhyamaka-vṛtti.” Ph.D. thesis. Australian National University, 1984.
Buddhashrījñāna (kha che’i rigs kyi paṇḍita chen po buddha śrī jñāna, slob dpon buddha śrī jñāna)
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Supramundane Victo-
rious Mother Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Realizations”: Wisdom Lamp Gar-
land
abhisamayālaṃkārabhagavatīprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstravṛttiprajñāpradīpāvali
bcom ldan ’das ma shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs
pa’i rgyan gyi ’grel pa shes rab sgron ma’i phreng ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3800). TBRC W23703.88:4-153 (PDF of
Peking 5198, vol. 91
Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Stanza Summary”
sañcayagāthāpañjikā
bsdus pa tshig su bcad pa'i dka' ’grel
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3798). TBRC W23703.87:233-380 (PDF
Peking 5196, vol. 91
Chandrakīrti (zla ba grags pa, seventh century)
[Auto]commentary on the “Supplement to (Nāgārjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the Middle’”
madhaymakāvatārabhāṣya
dbu ma la ’jug pa’i bshad pa / dbu ma la ’jug pa’i rang ’grel
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3862). TBRC W23703.102: 442-697
Peking 5263, vol. 98.
Also: Dharmsala, India: Council of Religious and Cultural Affairs, 1968.

Bibliography of Works Cited 145
Tibetan: Louis de La Vallée Poussin. Madhyamakāvatāra par Candrakīrti. Bibliotheca Bud-
dhica 9. Osnabrück, Germany: Biblio Verlag, 1970.
French translation (up to chap. 6, stanza 165): Louis de La Vallée Poussin. Muséon 8 (1907):
249-317; Muséon 11 (1910): 271-358; Muséon 12 (1911): 235-328.
German translation (chap. 6, stanzas 166-226): Helmut Tauscher. Candrakīrti-Madh-
yamakāvatāraḥ und Madhyamakāvatārabhāṣyam. Wiener Studien zur Tibetologie und Bud-
dhismuskunde, 5. Vienna: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien Universität
Wien, 1981.
Clear Words: Commentary on (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”
mūlamadhyamakavṛttiprasannapadā
dbu ma rtsa ba’i ’grel pa tshig gsal ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3860). TBRC W23703.102:4-401, vol.
’a (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-
Peking 5260, vol. 98.
Also: Dharmsala, India: Tibetan Cultural Printing Press, 1968.
Sanskrit: Louis de La Vallée Poussin. Mūlamadhyamakakārikās de Nāgārjuna avec la Prasan-
napadā commentaire de Candrakīrti. Bibliotheca Buddhica 4. Osnabrück, Germany: Biblio
Verlag, 1970. Also, J.W. de Jong. “Text-critical Notes on the Prasannapadā.” Indo-Iranian
Journal 20, nos. 1/2 (1978): 25-59 and nos. 3/4 (1978): 217-252. Also, Sanskrit, Tibetan, and
French translation of the Madhyamakaśāstrastuti that concludes Clear Words: J.W. de Jong.
“La Madhyamakaśāstrastuti de Candrakīrti.” Oriens Extremus 9 (1962): 47-56.
English translation (chaps. 1 and 25): T. Stcherbatsky. Conception of Buddhist Nirvāṇa, 77-222.
Leningrad: Office of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR, 1927; rev. reprint, Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1978.
English translation (chap. 2): Jeffrey Hopkins. “Analysis of Coming and Going.” Dharmsala,
India: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1974.
Partial English translation: Mervyn Sprung. Lucid Exposition of the Middle Way: The Essential
Chapters from the Prasannapadā of Candrakīrti translated from the Sanskrit. London:
Routledge, 1979; Boulder: Prajñā Press, 1979.
French translation (chaps. 2-4, 6-9, 11, 23, 24, 26, 28): Jacques May. Prasannapadā Madh-
yamaka-vṛtti, douze chapitres traduits du sanscrit et du tibétain. Paris: Adrien-Maisonneuve,
1959.
French translation (chaps. 18-22): J. W. de Jong. Cinq chapitres de la Prasannapadā. Paris:
Geuthner, 1949.
French translation (chap. 17): É. Lamotte. “Le Traité de l’acte de Vasubandhu, Karmasid-
dhiprakaraṇa.” Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 4 (1936): 265-288.
German translation (chaps. 5, 12-26): Stanislaw Schayer. Ausgewählte Kapitel aus der Prasan-
napadā. Krakow: Naktadem Polskiej Akademji Umiejetnosci, 1931.
German translation (chap. 10): Stanislaw Schayer. “Feuer und Brennstoff.” Rocznik Orjental-
istyczny 7 (1931): 26-52.
Commentary on (Āryadeva’s) “Four Hundred Stanzas on the Yogic Deeds of Bodhisattvas”
bodhisattvayogacaryācatuḥśatakaṭīkā
byang chub sems dpa’i rnal ’byor spyod pa gzhi brgya pa’i rgya cher ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3865). TBRC W23703.103:62-479 (PDF
Peking 5266, vol. 98.
Edited Tibetan text and Sanskrit fragments and English translation: Karen Lang. Āryadeva’s
Catuḥśataka: On the Bodhisattva’s Cultivation of Merit and Knowledge. Indiske Studier 7.
Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag, 1986. Also: Karen Lang. Four Illusions: Candrakīrti’s Ad-
vice to Travelers on the Bodhisattva Path. New York: Oxford University Press, 2003.
Edited Sanskrit fragments: Haraprasād Shāstri, “Catuḥśataka of Ārya Deva.” Memoirs of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal, III no. 8 (1914), 449-514. Also (chaps. 8-16): Vidhusekhara

146 Bibliography of Works Cited
Bhattacarya, ed. The Catuḥśataka of Āryadeva: Sanskrit and Tibetan texts with copious ex-
tracts from the commentary of Candrakīrti, Part II. Calcutta: Visva-Bharati Bookshop, 1931.
Edited Sanskrit fragments and Tibetan: Sanskrit fragments and Tibetan translation of Can-
drakīrti’s Bodhisattvayogacaryācatuḥśatakaṭīkā. Tokyo: 1994.
Commentary on (Nāgārjuna’s) “Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning”
yuktiṣaṣṭikāvṛtti
rigs pa drug cu pa'i ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3864). TBRC W23703.103:4-62 (PDF of
Peking 5265, vol. 98.
Edited Tibetan and French translation: Cristina Anna Scherrer-Schaub. Yuktiṣaṣṭikāvṛtti. Com-
mentaire à la soixantaine sur le raisonnement ou Du vrai enseignement de la causalité par le
Maitre indien Candrakīrti. Mélanges chinois et bouddhiques 25. Brussels: Institut belge des
hautes etudes chinoises, 1991.
Supplement to (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”
madhyamakāvatāra
dbu ma la ’jug pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3861). TBRC W23703.102:403-439
Peking 5261, Peking 5262, vol. 98.
Tibetan: Louis de La Vallée Poussin. Madhyamakāvatāra par Candrakīrti. Bibliotheca Bud-
dhica 9. Osnabrück, Germany: Biblio Verlag, 1970.
English translation: C. W. Huntington, Jr. The Emptiness of Emptiness: An Introduction to Early
Indian Mādhyamika, 147-195. Honolulu, Hawaii: University of Hawaii Press, 1989.
English translation (chaps. 1-5): Jeffrey Hopkins. Compassion in Tibetan Buddhism. London:
Rider, 1980; reprint, Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1980.
English translation (chap. 6): Stephen Batchelor. Echoes of Voidness by Geshé Rabten, 47-92.
London: Wisdom Publications, 1983.
See also references under Chandrakīrti’s [Auto]commentary on the “Supplement.”
Daṃṣhṭasena (kha che sde)
[Commentary on] the Three Mothers, Conquest over Harm / Extensive Explanation of the Superior
One Hundred Thousand Stanza, Twenty-f ive Thousand Stanza, and Eighteen Thousand Stanza
Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras (attributed to Vasubandhu)
āryaśatasāhasrikāpañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāṣṭadaśasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitābṛhaṭṭīkā
yum gsum gnod ’joms / ’phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa ’bum pa dang nyi khri lnga
stong pa dang khri brgyad stong pa’i rgya cher bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3808). TBRC W23703.93:4-586 (PDF
Peking 5206, vol. 93
1-cy 4 in Edward Conze. The Prajñā-pāramitā Literature. 'S-Gravenhage: Mouton and Co.,
1960; 2nd ed., Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1979.
Edward Conze. The Prajñā-pāramitā Literature. 'S-Gravenhage: Mouton and Co., 1960; 2nd
ed., Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1979.
Daṃṣhṭrasena
Extensive Commentary on the One Hundred Thousand Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra (attributed to
Tri-song-de-tsan, khri srong sde btsan, 755-804).
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa ʼbum gyi rgya cher ʼgrel pa
śatasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitābṛhaṭṭīkā; Peking 5205).
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ʼgyur (sde dge, 3807). TBRC W23703.91:4-663. (PDF
Devendramati / Devendrabuddhi (lha dbang blo, 630-690)
Explanation of the Difficult Points in (Dharmakīrtiʼs) “Commentary on (Dignāga’s) ‘Compilation

Bibliography of Works Cited 147
of Prime Cognition’”
pramāṇavārttikapañjikā
tshad ma rnam ʼgrel gyi dkaʼ ʼgrel
In bstan ʼgyur (sde dge, 4217). TBRC W23703.175:3-654 (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae
choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Sanskrit edition: Rāhula Sāṅkr ̣tyāyana, Dharmakīrti's Pramānavārttika with a Commentary by
Manorathanandin. JBORS 24-26, App., 531,151.
Dharmakīrti (chos kyi grags pa, seventh century)
Seven Treatises on Valid Cognition
1. Analysis of Relations
sambandhaparīkṣā
’brel pa brtag pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4215). TBRC W23703.174:513-523
Peking 5713, vol. 130.
2. Ascertainment of Prime Cognition
pramāṇaviniścaya
tshad ma rnam par nges pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4211). TBRC W23703.174:305-462
Peking 5710, vol. 130
Sanskrit edition: Chapter one Ernst Steinkellner, Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇaviniścaya. Chapters
1 and 2. Critically Edited. [Sanskrit Texts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region 2]. Beijing:
China Tibetology Publishing House – Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences Press, 2007.,
and ″Corrigenda 3 et addenda to Dharmakı̄ rti’s Pramāňaviniścaya. Chapters 1 and 2. Criti-
cally edited by Ernst Steinkellner. Beijing-Vienna 2007 (2.1.2013)”
http://www.ikga.oeaw.ac.at/Mat/steinkellner07_corrigenda.pdf
Chapter two and three: Pascale Hugon and Tōru Tomabechi, Dharmakīrti's Pramāṇaviniścaya
Chapter 3, [Sanskrit Texts from the Tibetan Autonomous Region 8]. Beijing: China Tibetol-
ogy Publishing House – Vienna: Austrian Academy of Sciences, 2012.
3. Commentary on (Dignāga’s) “Compilation of Prime Cognition”
pramāṇavārttikakārikā
tshad ma rnam ’grel gyi tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4210). TBRC W23703.174:189-304
Peking 5709, vol. 130.
Also: Sarnath, India: Pleasure of Elegant Sayings Press, 1974.
Sanskrit edition of first chapter: Input by Motoi Ono available from http://gretil.sub.uni-goettin-
gen.de/gretil.htm; remaining chapters: Dharmakirti:pramanavarttikakarika, chapters 2-4
(without the Svarthanumana-chapter) Input by Motoi Ono. of Y. Miyasaka, Pramanavarttika-
karika (Sanskrit and Tibetan). Acta Indologica 2, 1971/72, 1-206 http://gretil.sub.uni-goettin-
gen.de/gretil/1_sanskr/6_sastra/3_phil/buddh/dhkprvku.htm; also Digital Buddhist Sanskrit
Canon http://www.dsbcproject.org/node/7047
Sanskrit: Dwarikadas Shastri. Pramāṇavārttika of Āchārya Dharmakīrtti. Varanasi, India:
Bauddha Bharati, 1968. Also, Yūsho Miyasaka. “Pramāṇavarttika-Kārikā (Sanskrit and Ti-
betan),” Acta Indologica 2 (1971-1972): 1-206. Also, (chap. 1 and autocommentary) Raniero
Gnoli. The Pramāṇavārttikam of Dharmakīrti: The First Chapter with the Autocommentary.
Rome: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1960.
English translation (chap. 2): Masatoshi Nagatomi. “A Study of Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇavarttika:
An English Translation and Annotation of the Pramāṇavarttika, Book I.” Ph.D. diss., Harvard

148 Bibliography of Works Cited
University, 1957.
English translation (chap. 4, stanzas 1-148): Tom J.F. Tillemans. Dharmakīrti’s Pramāṇavārt-
tika: An Annotated Translation of the Fourth Chapter (parārthānumāna), vol. 1. Vienna:
Verlag der Osterreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2000.
English translation: John Donne. The Svopajñavṛtti: Dharmakīrti's Commentary on the Inference
Chapter (svārthānumānpariccheda) of his Prāmāṇavārttika. An English Translation From
the Sanskrit with Notes from the Commentaries of Śākyabuddhi and Karṇakagomin. Manu-
script. Harvard, 1996-1998; translation of the second chapter by Roger R. Jackson, Is Enlight-
enment Possible, Ithaca New York: Snow Lion Publications, 1993; Eli Franco, Dharmakīrti
on Compassion and Rebirth, Wien: Arbeitskreis für Tibetische und Buddhistische Studien,
Universität Wien, 1997; translation of the last chapter by Tom J.F. Tillemans, Dharmakīrti's
Pramāṇavārttika: An annotated translation of the fourth chapter. Wien: Verlag der Öster-
reischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, 2000.
4. Drop of Reasoning
nyāyabinduprakaraṇa
rigs pa’i thigs pa zhes bya ba’i rab tu byed pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4212). TBRC W23703.174:463-477 In
bstan 'gyur (sde dge). TBRC W23703. 174: 463 – 477 (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae
choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 5711, vol. 130.
English translation: Th. Stcherbatsky. Buddhist Logic. New York: Dover Publications, 1962.
5. Drop of Reasons
hetubindunāmaprakaraṇa
gtan tshigs kyi thigs pa zhes bya ba rab tu byed pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4213). TBRC W23703.174:477-511
Peking 5712, vol. 130.
6. Principles of Debate
vādanyāya
rtsod pa’i rigs pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4218). TBRC W23703.175:654-712
Peking 5715, vol. 130.
7. Proof of Other Continuums
saṃtānāntarasiddhināmaprakaraṇa
rgyud gzhan grub pa zhes bya ba’i rab tu byed pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4219). TBRC W23703.175:712719 (PDF
Peking 5716, vol. 130.
Auto-Commentary on (Dignāga’s) “Compilation of Prime Cognition”
tshad ma rnam ’grel gyi ’grel pa
pramāṇavārttikavṛtti
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4216), TBRC W23703.174:523-732
(Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Dharmakīrtishrī (chos kyi grags pa dpal / gser gling pa)
Explanation of (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Treatise of Quintessential Instruc-
tions on the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Realizations’”: Illumination of the
Difficult to Realize
prajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstrābhisamayālaṃkāravṛttidurbodhālokānāmaṭīkā
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi ’grel
pa rtogs par dka’ ba’i snang ba zhes bya ba’i ’grel bshad

Bibliography of Works Cited 149
In bstan ’gyur/ (dpe bsdur ma). TBRC W1PD95844.52:395-684 (Pe cin/: krung go’i bod rig pa’i
dpe skrun khang /, 1994-2008).
Peking 5192, vol. 91.
Dharmamitra (chos kyi bshes gnyen)
Explanation of (Haribhadra’s) Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realiza-
tions”: Clear Words
abhisamayālaṃkārakārikāprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstraṭīkāprasphuṭapadā
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi tshig
le’ur byas pa’i ’grel bshad tshig rab tu gsal ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3796). TBRC W23703.87:4-221 (PDF of
Peking 5194, vol. 91.
AA-cy 5-2 in Edward Conze. The Prajñā-pāramitā Literature. 'S-Gravenhage: Mouton and Co.,
1960; 2nd ed., Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1979.
Dharmatrāta
Compilations of Indicative Verse
udānavarga
ched du brjod pa’i tshom
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4099). TBRC W23703.148:4-91 (PDF of
Peking 992, vol. 39
Sanskrit edition: Ānandajoti Bhikkhu, Udānavarga, edited by Franz Bernhard (1965) together
with 2 studies, a metrical analysis, and a running commentary on the metre. The edition by
Franz Bernhard was originally published by Abhandlungen Der Akadamie Der Wissenschaf-
ten, Göttingen Philologisch-Historische Klasse, Vandenhoek & Ruprecht (Göttingen, 1965).
http://www.buddhanet-de.net/ancient-buddhist-texts/Buddhist-Texts/S1-Udanavarga/in-
dex.htm
English translation: W. Woodville Rockhill. The Udānavarga: A Collection of Stanzas from the
Buddhist Canon. London: Trübner, 1883. Also: Gareth Sparham. The Tibetan Dhammapada.
New Delhi: Mahayana Publications, 1983; rev. ed., London: Wisdom Publications, 1986.
Dharmashrī
Explanation of the “Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”
śatasāhasrikāvivaraṇa
stong phrag brgya pa'i rnam par bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3802). TBRC W23703.88:409-541 (PDF
Peking 5203, vol. 92.
Key to the Treasury of the Perfection of Wisdom
prajñāpāramitākośatalā
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i mdzod kyi lde mig
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3806). TBRC W23703.90:457-471 (PDF
Peking 5204, vol. 92.
Dignāga (phyogs kyi glangs po, sixth century)
Compilation of Prime Cognition
pramāṇasamuccaya
tshad ma kun las btus pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4204). TBRC W23703.174:3-29 (PDF
Peking 5700, vol. 130.
English translation (partial): M. Hattori. Dignāga, On Perception. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1968.
Examination of Objects of Observation

150 Bibliography of Works Cited
ālambanaparīkṣa
dmigs pa brtag pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4205). TBRC W23703.174:173-173
Peking 5703, vol. 130.
Summary Meanings of the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra
prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtha / prajñāpāramitāsaṃgrahakārikā
brgyad stong don bsdus / shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin ma bsdus pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3809). TBRC W23703.93:586-590 (PDF
Peking 5207, vol. 94.
Guṇaprabha (yon tan ’od )
Aphorisms on Discipline
vinayasūtra
’dul ba’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4117). TBRC W23703.159:3-201 (PDF
Peking 5619, vol. 123.
Sanskrit: P.V.Bapat & V.V.Gokhale, Vinayasūtra, Patna: K.P.Jayaswal Research Institute, 1982.
Available from Uwest.edu http://www.dsbcproject.org/node/6511
Haribhadra (seng nge bzang po, fl. 750-800)
Clear Meaning Commentary / Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instruc-
tions on the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Realizations”
sphuṭārtha / abhisamayālaṃkāranāmaprajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstravivṛti
’grel pa don gsal / shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs
pa’i rgyan ces bya ba’i ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge). TBRC W23703 86: 158-281 (PDF of:
Delhi, India: Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
English translation: Sparham, Gareth. Ā ryavimuktisena, Maitreyanā tha, and Haribhadra. Ab-
hisamayā laṃ kā ra with Vṛtti and Ālokā. 4 vols. Fremont, CA: Jain Publishing Company,
2006-2011.
AA-cy 5 in Edward Conze. The Prajñā-pāramitā Literature. 'S-Gravenhage: Mouton and Co.,
1960; 2nd ed., Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1979.
Sanskrit: Koei H. Amano. Abhisamayālaṃkāra-kārikā-śāstra-vivṛti. Haribhadra’s Commentary
on the Abhisamayālaṃkārakārikā-śāstra edited for the first time from a Sanskrit Manuscript.
Kyoto: Heirakuji-Shoten. 2000. A re-translation into Sanskrit from Tibetan by Rāmaśaṅkara
Tripāṭhī. Ed. Abhisamayālaṃkāra-vṛtti Sphuṭārthā. Bibliotheca Indo-Tibetica 2. Sarnath: Ti-
betan Institute, 1977.
Tibetan: Koei H. Amano. A Study on the Abhisamayālaṃkāra-nāma-prajñāpāramitopadeśaśās-
tra-vṛtti. Tokyo: Japan Sciences Press, 1975. In bstan 'gyur (sde dge) TBRC W23703.86 78-
140.
Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Verse Summary of the Precious Qualities of the Supra-
mundane Victorious [Mother]”
bhagavatīratnaguṇasaṃcayagāthāpañjikāsubodhinīnāma
bcom ldan ’das yon tan rin po che sdus pa’i tshig su bcad pa’i dka’ ’grel
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3790). TBRC W23703.86:4-157 (PDF
Peking 5190.
Eight Chaptered / [Commentary on the] “Twenty-Five Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtra”
pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāprajñāpāramitā

Bibliography of Works Cited 151
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa stong phrag nyi shu lnga pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3790). TBRC W23703.82:4-631 (PDF
Peking 5188
2 in Edward Conze. The Prajñā-pāramitā Literature. 'S-Gravenhage: Mouton and Co., 1960;
2nd ed., Tokyo: Reiyukai, 1979.
Sanskrit of the first abhisamaya of Haribhadra’s revised version: Nalinaksha Dutt. Ed.
Pañcaviṃśati-sāhasrikā Prajñā-pāramitā. Edited with critical notes and introduction. Cal-
cutta Oriental Series, 28. London: Luzac, 1934. The Sanskrit and Tibetan of the remaining
abhisamayas: Edward Conze. Ed. Ms. Cambridge Add. 1628 with various additions. Photo-
copy of typed manuscript. No date, no place.
English translation of parts in Edward Conze, The Large Sutra on Perfect Wisdom. Berkeley:
University of California Press, 1975.
Explanation of the “Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”: Illumination of (Mait-
reya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”
aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāvyākhyānābhisamayālaṃkārālokā
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa’i bshad pa mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi snang
ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge). TBRC W23703.85: 4-683 (PDF of:
Delhi, India: Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Jalattatalar (attributed by Gareth Sparham to Shāntākara / Shi-wa-jung-nay [zhi ba ʼbyung gnas])
Commentary called “Following the Tradition of the Supramundane Victorious [Mother]”
bhagavatyāmnayānusāriṇīnāmavyākhyāna
bcom ldan ʼdas maʼi man ngag gi rjes su ʼbrang ba zhes bya baʼi rnam par bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3811). TBRC W23703.94:4-641. (PDF
Jinaputra (rgyal ba’i sras)
Commentary on (Asaṅga’s) “Summary of Manifest Knowledge”
abhidharmasamuccayabhāṣya
chos mngon pa kun las btus pa'i bshad pa.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4053). TBRC W23703.135:4-235 (PDF
Jitāri/Jetāri (dgra las rgyal ba, c. 10th century)
Differentiating the Sugata’s Texts
sugatamatavibhaṅgakārikā
bde bar gshegs pa gzhung rnam par ’byed pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3899). TBRC W23703.109:16-17 (PDF
[Auto]commentary on “Differentiating the Sugata’s Texts”
sugatamatavibhaṅgabhāṣya,
bde bar gshegs pa’i gzhung rnam par ’byed pa’i bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3900). TBRC W23703.109:17-134 (PDF
Jñānagarbha (ye shes snying po, eighth century)
Autocommentary of Differentiation of the Two Truths
bden gnyis rnam ’byed pa’i ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge). TBRC W23703.107: 8-32 (PDF of:
English translation with critical edition: Eckel, Malcolm D. Jñānagarbha’s Commentary on the
Distinction between the Two Truths: An Eighth Century Handbook of Madhyamaka Philoso-
phy. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1987.
Differentiation of the Two Truths
satyadvayavibhaṅgakārika

152 Bibliography of Works Cited
bden pa gnyis rnam par ’byed pa’i tshig le’u byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3882). TBRC W23703.107: 4-8 (PDF of:
Kamalashīla (kā ma li shī la, 740-795)
Stages of Medition
bhāvanākrama
sgom pa'i rim pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3915). TBRC W23703.107: 8-32 (PDF
of: Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit and English translation: Tucci, Giuseppe. ″First Bhāvanākrama of
Kamalasīla″ in Minor Buddhist Texts II. Rome: IsMEO, 1958:154-282
Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit and English translation: Tucci, Giuseppe. “Third Bhavanakrama”
in Minor Buddhist Texts III. Rome: IsMEO, 1971
Illumination of the Middle
madhyamakāloka
dbu ma snang ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3887). TBRC W23703.107:268-489
Peking 5287
Explanation of the Difficult Points in (Shāntarakṣhita’s) 'Autocommentary to the “Ornament for
the Middle“'
madhyamakālaṃkārapañjikā
dbu ma rgyan gyi dka' 'grel
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3886). TBRC W23703.107:169-268.
Kumārashrībhadra
Summary of (Maitreya’s) “Perfection of Wisdom”
prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtha
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i don bsdus pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3797). TBRC W23703.87:221-233 (PDF
of New Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1971).
Peking 5195, vol. 91.
Maitreya (byams pa)
Five Doctrines of Maitreya
1. Great Vehicle Treatise on the Sublime Continuum / Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great
Vehicle
mahāyānottaratantraśāstra
theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma’i bstan bcos
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4024). TBRC W23703.123: 109-148
Peking eking 5525, vol. 108; sde dge 4024, Dharma vol. 77
Sanskrit: E. H. Johnston (and T. Chowdhury). The Ratnagotravibhāga Mahāyānottaratantraśās-
tra. Patna, India: Bihar Research Society, 1950.
English translation: E. Obermiller. “Sublime Science of the Great Vehicle to Salvation.” Acta
Orientalia 9 (1931): 81-306. Also: J. Takasaki. A Study on the Ratnagotravibhāga. Rome:
Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente, 1966.
2. Differentiation of Phenomena and Noumenon
dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga
chos dang chos nyid rnam par ’byed pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4022). TBRC W23703.123:93-100 (PDF

Bibliography of Works Cited 153
of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-
Peking 5523, vol. 108.
Edited Tibetan: Jōshō Nozawa. “The Dharmadharmatāvibhaṅga and the Dharmadharmatā-
vibhaṅgavṛtti, Tibetan Texts, Edited and Collated, Based upon the Peking and Derge Edi-
tions.” In Studies in Indology and Buddhology: Presented in Honour of Professor Susumu
Yamaguchi on the Occasion of his Sixtieth Birthday, edited by Gadjin M. Nagao and Jōshō
Nozawa. Kyoto: Hozokan, 1955.
English translation: John Younghan Cha. A Study of the Dharmadharmatāvibhāga: An Analysis
of the Religious Philosophy of the Yogācāra, Together with an Annotated Translation of
Vasubandhu’s Commentary. PhD diss., Northwestern University, 1996.
English translation: Jim Scott. Maitreya’s Distinguishing Phenomena and Pure Being with Com-
mentary by Mipham. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2004.
3. Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes
madhyāntavibhaṅga
dbus dang mtha’ rnam par ’byed pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4021). TBRC W23703.123:81-92 (PDF
Peking 5522, vol. 108; Dharma vol. 77.
Sanskrit: Gadjin M. Nagao. Madhyāntavibhāga-bhāṣya. Tokyo: Suzuki Research Foundation,
1964. Also: Ramchandra Pandeya. Madhyānta-vibhāga-śāstra. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1971.
English translation: Stefan Anacker. Seven Works of Vasubandhu. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1984.
Also, of chapter 1: Thomas A. Kochumuttom. A Buddhist Doctrine of Experience. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1982. Also, of chapter 1: F. Th. Stcherbatsky. Madhyāntavibhāga, Discourse on
Discrimination between Middle and Extremes ascribed to Bodhisattva Maitreya and Com-
mented by Vasubandhu and Sthiramati. Bibliotheca Buddhica 30 (1936). Osnabrück, Ger-
many: Biblio Verlag, 1970; reprint, Calcutta: Indian Studies Past and Present, 1971. Also, of
chapter 1: David Lasar Friedmann. Sthiramati, Madhyāntavibhāgaṭīkā: Analysis of the Mid-
dle Path and the Extremes. Utrecht, Netherlands: Rijksuniversiteit te Leiden, 1937. Also, of
chapter 3: Paul Wilfred O’Brien, S.J. “A Chapter on Reality from the Madhyāntavibhāgaçās-
tra.” Monumenta Nipponica 9, nos. 1-2 (1953): 277-303 and Monumenta Nipponica 10, nos.
1-2 (1954): 227-269.
4. Ornament for the Clear Realizations
abhisamayālaṃkāra/ abhisamayālaṁkāra-nāma-prajñāpāramitopadeśaśāstrakārikā
mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan/ shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par
rtogs pa'i rgyan shes bya ba'i tshig le'ur byas pa
Sanskrit editions:
Amano, Kōei. A study on the Abhisamaya-alaṃ kā ra-kā rikā -ś ā stra-vṛtti. Rev. ed. Yanai City,
Japan: Rokoku Bunko, 2008.
Stcherbatsky, Theodore and Eugène Obermiller, eds. Abhisamayā laṅ kā ra-Prajñ ā pā ramitā -
Upadeś a-śā stra: The Work of Bodhisattva Maitreya. Bibliotheca Indo-Buddhica Series. Re-
print ed. Delhi, India: Sri Satguru Publications, 1992.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3786). TBRC W23703.80:3-28 (PDF of
Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae Choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
English translations:
Brunnhölzl, Karl. Gone Beyond: The Prajñ ā pā ramitā Sū tras, The Ornament of Clear Reali-
zation, and its Commentaries in the Tibetan Kagyü tradition. The Tsadra Foundation se-
ries. 2 vols. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 2011-2012.
―――. Groundless Paths: The Prajñāpāramitā Sūtras, The Ornament of Clear Realization,
and Its Commentaries in the Tibetan Nyingma Tradition. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publica-
tions, 2012.

154 Bibliography of Works Cited
Conze, Edward. Abhisamayālaṅkāra: Introduction and Translation from Original Text with
Sanskrit-Tibetan Index. Roma, Italy: Is. M.E.O., 1954.
Hopkins, Jeffrey and Jongbok Yi. Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations. Dyke,
VA: UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies, 2015: downloadable at uma-tibet.org.
―――. Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s Explanation of the Treatise “Ornament for the Clear Realiza-
tions” From the Approach of the Meaning of the Words: The Sacred Word of Mait-
reyanātha. Dyke, VA: UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies, 2014: downloadable at uma-
tibet.org.
―――. (containing 203 of the 274 stanzas) The Hidden Teaching of the Perfection of Wis-
dom Sūtras: Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Seventy Topics and Kön-chog-jig-may-wang-po’s 173
Topics. Dyke, VA: UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies, 2014: downloadable at uma-ti-
bet.org.
Sparham, Gareth. Ā ryavimuktisena, Maitreyanā tha, and Haribhadra. Abhisamayā laṃ kā ra
with Vṛtti and Ālokā. 4 vols. Fremont, CA: Jain Publishing Company., 2006-2011.
―――. Golden Garland of Eloquence: legs bshad gser phreng, 4 vols. Fremont, CA: Jain
Publishing Company, 2008-2010.
5. Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras
mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra
theg pa chen po’i mdo sde rgyan gyi tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4020). TBRC W23703.123:3-80 (PDF
Peking 5521, vol. 108; Dharma vol. 77.
Sanskrit: Sylvain Lévi. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, exposé de la doctrine du grand véhicule selon
le système Yogācāra. Paris: Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études, 1907. Also, Si-
tansusekhar Bagchi. Mahāyāna-Sūtrālaṃkāraḥ of Asaṅga [with Vasubandhu’s commentary].
Buddhist Sanskrit Texts, 13. Darbhanga, India: Mithila Institute, 1970. Available online from
Digital Buddhist Sanskrit Canon (University of the West. Rosemead, California)
http://www.dsbcproject.org/node/6803
English translation: L. Jamspal et al; editor-in-chief Robert A.F. Thurman. The Universal Vehicle
Discourse Literature (Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra). New York: American Institute of Buddhist
Studies, 2004.
French translation: Sylvain Lévi. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, exposé de la doctrine du grand véhic-
ule selon le système Yogācāra. Paris: Bibliothèque de l’École des Hautes Études, 1911.
Nāgamitra (klu’i bshes gnyen, fl. ca 450?)
Entrance Door to the Three Bodies
kāyatrayāvatāramukha-nāma-śāstra
sku gsum la ’jug pa'i sgo zhes bya ba’i bstan bcos
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3890). TBRC W23703.108:4-17. (PDF
Nāgārjuna (klu grub, fl. ca. 200 CE)
Tree of Wisdom / Treatise on Moral Conduct: Tree of Wisdom
prajñādaṇḍa /nītiśāstraprajñādaṇḍa
lugs kyi bstan bcos shes rab sdong bu
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4329). TBRC W23703.203:207-227
Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit and English translation: Michael Hahn, ″The Tibetan Shes rab sdong
bu and its Indian Sources (I-III)″ South Asian Classical Studies 4-6, 2009-2011: 1-78, 1-50,
305-378. Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit texts (romanized) with English translation of vss 1-110,
111-185, 186-260 with a concordance against other Nīti texts.
Commentary on the “Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness”
śūnyatāsaptativṛtti
stong pa nyid bdun cu pa’i ’grel pa

Bibliography of Works Cited 155
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3831). TBRC W23703.96:221-243 (PDF
of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, gyalwae sun-grab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 5231, vol.95.
Edited Tibetan and English translation: Christian Lindtner. Master of Wisdom. Oakland: Dharma
Publishing, 1986.
Compendium of Sūtra
sūtrasamuccaya
mdo kun las btus pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3934). TBRC W23703.110:298-431
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, gyalwae sun-grab partun khang, 1982-
Peking 5330, vol. 102.
Conquest Over Mistake
madhyamakabhramaghāta
dbu ma ’khrul pa ’joms pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3850). TBRC W23703.97:49-54 (PDF of
Essay on the Mind of Enlightenment
bodhicittavivaraṇa
byang chub sems kyi ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 1800-1801). TBRC W23703.35:77-86,
vol. ngi (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang,
1982-1985).
Peking 2665 and 2666, vol. 61.
Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit fragments along with English translation: Christian Lindtner. Master
of Wisdom: Writings of the Buddhist Master Nāgārjuna. Oakland: Dharma Publishing, 1986.
Praise of the Element of Attributes
dharmadhātustotra
chos kyi dbyings su bstod pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 1118). TBRC W23703.1:128-136, vol.
ka (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-
Peking 2010, vol. 46.
Praise of the Inconceivable
acintyastava
bsam gyis mi khyab par bstod pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan 'gyur (sde dge, 1128). TBRC W23703.1:154-159 (PDF
Edited Sanskrit and English translation: Christian Lindtner. Master of Wisdom. Oakland:
Dharma Publishing, 1986.
Praise of the Perfection of Wisdom (also attributed to Rāhulabhadra)
prajñāpāramitāstotra
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin ma’i bstod pa/ rnam par mi rtog par bstod pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 1127). TBRC W23703.1:153-154. (PDF
Sanskrit: Nalinaksha Dutt. Ed. Pañcaviṃśati-sāhasrikā Prajñā-pāramitā. Edited with critical
notes and introduction. Calcutta Oriental Series, 28. London: Luzac, 1934; reprint ed. R.N
Bhattacharya, Calcutta, 2000, pp.1-3.
Praise of the Supramundane [Buddha]
lokātītastava
’jig rten las ’das par bstod pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 1120). TBRC W23703.1:138-140, vol.
ka (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-

156 Bibliography of Works Cited
Peking 2012, vol. 46.
Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit along with English translation: Christian Lindtner. Master of Wis-
dom. Oakland: Dharma Publishing, 1986.
Six Collections of Reasoning
1. Treatise on the Middle / Fundamental Treatise on the Middle, Called “Wisdom”
madhyamakaśāstra / prajñānāmamūlamadhyamakakārikā
dbu ma’i bstan bcos / dbu ma rtsa ba’i tshig le’ur byas pa shes rab ces bya ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3824). TBRC W23703.96:3-39, vol. tsa
(PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Kar-mapae choedhey, gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-
Peking 5224, vol. 95.
Edited Sanskrit: J. W. de Jong. Nāgārjuna, Mūlamadhyamakakārikāḥ. Madras, India: Adyar Li-
brary and Research Centre, 1977; reprint, Wheaton, Ill.: Agents, Theosophical Publishing
House, c1977. Also: Christian Lindtner. Nāgārjuna’s Filosofiske Vaerker, 177-215. Indiske
Studier 2. Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag, 1982.
English translation: Frederick Streng. Emptiness: A Study in Religious Meaning. Nashville,
Tenn.: Abingdon Press, 1967. Also: Kenneth Inada. Nāgārjuna: A Translation of His
Mūlamadhyamakakārikā. Tokyo: Hokuseido Press, 1970. Also: David J. Kalupahana. Nāgār-
juna: The Philosophy of the Middle Way. Albany, N.Y.: State University Press of New York,
1986. Also: Jay L. Garfield. The Fundamental Wisdom of the Middle Way. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1995. Also: Stephen Batchelor. Verses from the Center: A Buddhist Vision
of the Sublime. New York: Riverhead Books, 2000.
English translation: Geshe Ngawang Samten and Jay L. Garfield. Ocean of Reasoning. New
York: Oxford University Press, 2006. Gareth Sparham. Unpublished ms., undated.
Italian translation: R. Gnoli. Nāgārjuna: Madhyamaka Kārikā, Le stanze del cammino di mezzo.
Enciclopedia di autori classici 61. Turin, Italy: P. Boringhieri, 1961.
Danish translation: Christian Lindtner. Nāgārjuna’s Filosofiske Vaerker, 67-135. Indiske Studier
2. Copenhagen: Akademisk Forlag, 1982.
2. Refutation of Objections
vigrahavyāvartanīkārikā
rtsod pa bzlog pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3828). TBRC W23703.96:55-59 (PDF of
Peking 5228, vol. 95
Edited Tibetan and Sanskrit and English translation: Christian Lindtner. Master of Wisdom. Oak-
land: Dharma Publishing, 1986.
English translation: K. Bhattacharya, E. H. Johnston, and A. Kunst. The Dialectical Method of
Nāgārjuna. New Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1978.
English translation from the Chinese: G. Tucci. Pre-Diṅnāga Buddhist Texts on Logic from Chi-
nese Sources. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, 49. Baroda, India: Oriental Institute, 1929.
French translation: S. Yamaguchi. “Traité de Nāgārjuna pour écarter les vaines discussion
(Vigrahavyāvartanī) traduit et annoté.” Journal Asiatique 215 (1929): 1-86.
3. Seventy Stanzas on Emptiness
śūnyatāsaptatikārikā
stong pa nyid bdun cu pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3827). TBRC W23703.96:49-55 (PDF of
Peking 5227, vol. 95.
Edited Tibetan and English translation: Christian Lindtner. Master of Wisdom. Oakland: Dharma
Publishing, 1986.
English translation: David Ross Komito. Nāgārjuna’s “Seventy Stanzas”: A Buddhist Psychol-
ogy of Emptiness. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1987.

Bibliography of Works Cited 157
4. Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning
yuktiṣaṣṭikākārikā
rigs pa drug cu pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3825). TBRC W23703.96:42-46 (PDF of
Peking 5225, vol. 95.
Edited Tibetan with Sanskrit fragments and English translation: Christian Lindtner. Master of
Wisdom. Oakland: Dharma Publishing, 1986.
English translation: Joseph Loizzo. Nāgārjuna’s Reason Sixty. New York: American Institute of
Buddhist Studies, 2007. Gareth Sparham. Unpublished ms., undated.
5. Precious Garland of Advice for the King
rājaparikathāratnāvalī
rgyal po la gtam bya ba rin po che’i phreng ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4158). TBRC W23703.172:215-253
(PDF of Delhi, India: Del-hi Karmapae choedhey, gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-
Peking 5658, vol. 129; Dharma vol. 93.
Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese: Michael Hahn. Nāgārjuna’s Ratnāvalī. vol. 1. The Basic Texts
(Sanskrit, Tibetan, and Chinese). Bonn: Indica et Tibetica Verlag, 1982.
English translation: Jeffrey Hopkins. Buddhist Advice for Living and Liberation: Nāgārjuna’s
Precious Garland, 94-164. Ithaca, New York: Snow Lion Publications, 1998. Supersedes that
in: Nāgārjuna and the Seventh Dalai Lama. The Precious Garland and the Song of the Four
Mindfulnesses, translated by Jeffrey Hopkins, 17-93. London: George Allen and Unwin,
1975; New York: Harper and Row, 1975; reprint, in H.H. the Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso.
The Buddhism of Tibet. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1983; reprint, Ithaca, New York:
Snow Lion Publications, 1987.
English translation: John Dunne and Sara McClintock. The Precious Garland: An Epistle to a
King. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1997.
English translation of 223 stanzas (chap. 1, 1-77; chap. 2, 1-46; chap. 4, 1-100): Giuseppe Tucci.
“The Ratnāvalī of Nāgārjuna.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society (1934): 307-325; (1936):
237-52, 423-35.
Japanese translation: Uryūzu Ryushin. Butten II, Sekai Koten Bungaku Zenshu, 7 (July, 1965):
349-72. Edited by Nakamura Hajime. Tokyo: Chikuma Shobō. Also: Uryūzu Ryushin. Daijō
Butten, 14 (1974): 231-316. Ryūju Ronshū. Edited by Kajiyama Yuichi and Uryūzu Ryushin.
Tokyo: Chūōkōronsha.
Danish translation: Christian Lindtner. Nagarjuna, Juvelkaeden og andre skrifter. Copenhagen:
1980.
6. Treatise Called the Finely Woven
vaidalyasūtranāma
zhib mo rnam par ’thag pa zhes bya ba’i mdo
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3826). TBRC W23703.96:46-49 (PDF of
Peking 5226, vol. 95
Tibetan text and English translation: Fermando Tola and Carmen Dragonetti. Nāgārjuna’s Ref-
utation of Logic (Nyāya) Vaidalyaprakaraṇa. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1995.
Prajñākaragupta (shes rab ’byung gnas sbas pa, 750-810)
Ornament for (Dharmakīrti's) “Commentary on (Dignāga’s) 'Compilation of Prime Cognition'“
pramān ̣avārttikālaṅkāra
tshad ma rnam ’grel gyi rgyan
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4221). TBRC W23703.178:3-617. (PDF
Sanskrit editionn: Rāhula Sāṅkr ̣tyāyana, Pramā ṇavā rtikabhā shyam or Vā rtikā laṅ kā raḥ of
Prajñā kara- gupta (Being a commentary on Dharmakı̄ rti’s Pramā ṇavā rtikam), Patna: Kashi

158 Bibliography of Works Cited
Prasad Jayaswal Research Institute 1943 (Tibetan Sanskrit Works Series I) published at Ba-
naras Hindu University; available from Digital Library of India
Prajñākaramati (shes rab ’byung gnas blo gros, 950-1030)
Summary of (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary on (Maitreya’s) ‘Ornament for the Clear Realizations’”
abhisamayālaṃkāravṛittipiṇḍārtha
mngon par rtogs paʼi rgyan gyi ’grel paʼi bsdus don
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3795). TBRC W23703.86:510-551. (PDF
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W1KG15517 (Kokonor: mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1991).
Peking 5193, vol. 91.
Puṇḍarīka, Kalkī (rigs ldan pad ma dkar po)
Great Commentary on the “Kālachakra Tantra”: Stainless Light
vimālaprabhānāmamūlatantrānusāriṇīdvādaśasāhasrikālaghukālacakratantrarājaṭīkā
bsdus pa’i rgyud kyi rgyal po dus kyi ’khor lo’i ’grel bshad rtsa ba’i rgyud kyi rjes su ’jug pa
stong phrag bcu gnyis pa dri ma med pa’i ’od ces bya ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 1347). TBRC W23703.11:216-555 (PDF
English translation of the first section: John Newman. “The Outer Wheel of Time: Vajrayāna
Buddhist Cosmology in the Kālachakra Tantra.” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Wisconsin,
1987.
Ratnākaraśānti (rin chen ’byung gnas zhi ba)
Commentary on the Difficult Points of the “Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra”:
The Supreme Essence
ārya-aṣṭasāhasrikāprajñāpāramitāpañjikāsārottamā
phags pa shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyad stong pa’i dka’ ’grel snying po mchog
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3803). TBRC W23703.89:4-461 (PDF of
P5200, vol. 92
Pure Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”
abhisamayālaṃkārakārikāvṛittiśuddhamatīnāma
mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi ’grel pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa’i ’grel pa dag ldan
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3801). TBRC W23703.88:152-409. (PDF
Peking 5199, vol. 91
Ratnakīrti
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”: A Portion of Glory
abhisamayālaṃkāravṛittikīrtikalānāma
mngon par rtogs paʼi rgyan gyi ʼgrel pa grags paʼi cha
In bstan ʼgyur (sde dge, 3799). TBRC W23703.87:380-523 (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Kar-
mapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Shāntideva (zhi ba lha, eighth century C.E.)
Compendium of Instructions
śikṣāsamuccaya
bslab pa kun las btus pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3940). TBRC W23703.111:7-390 (PDF
Peking 5272, vol. 102
English Translation: C. Bendall and W.H.D. Rouse. Śikṣā Samuccaya. Delhi: Motilal, 1971.
Edited Sanskrit: Cecil Bendall. Çikshāsamuccaya: A Compendium of Buddhistic Teaching. Bib-
liotheca Buddhica 1. Osnabrück, Germany: Biblio Verlag, 1970.
Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds
bodhi[sattva]caryāvatāra
byang chub sems dpa’i spyod pa la ’jug pa

Bibliography of Works Cited 159
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3871). TBRC W23703.105: 84-578, dbu
ma, vol. la (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang,
1982-1985).
Sanskrit: P. L. Vaidya. Bodhicaryāvatāra. Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 12. Darbhanga, India: Mithila
Institute, 1988.
Sanskrit and Tibetan: Vidhushekara Bhattacharya. Bodhicaryāvatāra. Bibliotheca Indica, 280.
Calcutta: Asiatic Society, 1960.
Sanskrit and Tibetan with Hindi translation: Rāmaśaṃkara Tripāthī, ed. Bodhicaryāvatāra.
Bauddha-Himālaya-Granthamālā, 8. Leh, Ladākh: Central Institute of Buddhist Studies,
1989.
English translations:
Stephen Batchelor. A Guide to the Bodhisattva’s Way of Life. Dharmsala, India: Library of
Tibetan Works and Archives, 1979.
Marion Matics. Entering the Path of Enlightenment. New York: Macmillan, 1970.
Kate Crosby and Andrew Skilton. The Bodhicaryāvatāra. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
1996.
Padmakara Translation Group. The Way of the Bodhisattva. Boston: Shambhala, 1997.
Vesna A. Wallace and B. Alan Wallace. A Guide to the Bodhisattva Way of Life. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Snow Lion Publications, 1997.
Contemporary commentary:
H.H. the Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso. Transcendent Wisdom. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publi-
cations, 1988.
H.H. the Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso. A Flash of Lightning in the Dark of the Night. Boston:
Shambhala, 1994.
Shāntarakṣhita (śāntarakṣita, zhi ba ’tsho, 725-788)
Autocommentary to the “Ornament for the Middle“
madhyamakālaṃkāravṛtti
dbu ma rgyan gyi ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3885). TBRC W23703.107:114-169
Compendium of Principles
tattvasaṃgrahakārikā
de kho na nyid bsdud pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4266). TBRC W23703.191:4-267 (PDF
P5764, vol. 138
Sanskrit: Dwarikadas Shastri. Tattvasaṅgraha of Ācārya Shāntarakṣita, with the Commentary
“Pañjikā” of Shrī Kamalashīla. Varanasi, India: Bauddha Bharati, 1968.
English translation: G. Jha. The Tattvasaṃgraha of Śāntirakṣita, with the commentary of Kama-
lashīla. Gaekwad’s Oriental Series 80 and 83. Baroda, India: Oriental Institute, 1937, 1939;
reprint, Delhi: Motilal Barnarsidass, 1986.
Ornament for the Middle
madhyamakālaṃkārakārikā
dbu ma rgyan gyi tshig le'ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3884). TBRC W23703.107:107-114
Edited Tibetan and English translation: Masamichi Ichigō. “Śāntarakṣita’s Madh-
yamakālaṃkāra” in Studies in the Literature of the Great Vehicle. Michigan Studies in Bud-
dhist Literature No. 1, edited by Luis O. Gúmez and Jonathan A. Silk, 141-240. Ann Arbor:
Collegiate Institute for the Study of Buddhist Literature and Center for South and Southeast
Asian Studies, The University of Michigan, 1989.

160 Bibliography of Works Cited
Smṛtijñānakīrti
Indicating Through Eight Concordant Meanings the Mother Perfection of Wisdom Taught Exten-
sively in One Hundred Thousand, Taught in Medium Length in Twenty-five Thousand, and
Taught in Brief in Eight Thousand [Stanzas]
prajñāpāramitāmātṛikāśatasāhasrikābṛhacchāsana-
pañcaviṃśatisāhasrikāmadhyaśāsanāṣṭādaśasāhasrikālaghuśāsanāṣṭasamānārthaśāsana
yum shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa brgyas par bstan pa ’bum dang ’bring du bstan pa nyi khri
lnga stong dang bsdus te bstan pa khri brgyad stong pa rnams mthun par don brgyad kyis
bstan pa
In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3789). TBRC W23703.81:365-487 (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Kar-
mapae choedhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
P5187, vol. 88.
Sthiramati (blo gros brtan pa, fl. 6th century)
Commentary on (Vasubandhu's) Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Great Vehicle
Sūtras”
sūtrālaṃkāravṛttibhāṣya
mdo sde rgyan gyi ’grel bshad
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4034). TBRC W23703.125:4-567 (PDF
Detailed Explanation of (Vasubandhu's) “Differentiation of the Five Skandhas”
pañcaskandhaprakaraṇavaibhāṣā
phung po lnga'i rab tu byed pa bye brag tu bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4066). TBRC W23703.136:392-501
Vajragarbha (rdo rje snying po)
Commentary on the Condensation of the Hevajra Tantra
hevajrapiṇḍārthaṭīkā
kye’i rdo rje bsdus pa’i don gyi rgya cher ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 1189(a)). TBRC W23703.2:2-253 (PDF
Peking 2310, vol. 53.
Vasubandhu (dbyig gnyen, fl. 360)
Commentary on (Asaṅga’s) “Summary of the Great Vehicle”
mahāyānasaṃgrahabhāṣya
theg pa chen po bsdus pa’i ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4050). TBRC W23703.134:244-381
Peking 5551, vol. 112.
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Differentiation of the Middle and the Extremes”
madhyāntavibhāgaṭīkā
dbus dang mtha’ rnam par ’byed pa’i ’grel pa / dbus mtha’i ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4027). TBRC W23703.124:4-55 (PDF of
Peking 5528, vol. 108
Sanskrit: Gadjin M. Nagao. Madhyāntavibhāga-bhāṣya. Tokyo: Suzuki Research Foundation,
1964. Also: Ramchandra Pandeya. Madhyānta-vibhāga-śāstra. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1971.
Commentary on the “Sūtra on Dependent-Arising”
pratītyasamutpadādivibhaṅganirdeśa
rten ’brel mdo ’grel/ rten cing ’brel par ’byung ba dang po dang rnam par dbye ba bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3995). TBRC W23703.115:4-123 (PDF

Bibliography of Works Cited 161
Peking 5496, vol. 107.
Commentary on the “Sūtra on the Ten Grounds”
daśabhūmivyākhyāna
sa bcu’i rnam par bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3993). TBRC W23703.113:208533 (PDF
Peking 5494, vol. 104.
Commentary on the “Teachings of Akṣhayamati Sūtra”
āryākṣayamatinirdeśaṭīkā
’phags pa blo gros mi zad pas bstan pa rgya cher ’grel pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 3994). TBRC W23703.114:4-539. (PDF
Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras”
sūtrālaṃkārābhāṣya
mdo sde’i rgyan gyi bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4026). TBRC W23703.123:260-521
Peking 5527, vol. 108.
Sanskrit: S. Bagchi. Mahāyāna-Sūtrālaṃkāra of Asaṅga [with Vasubandhu’s commentary].
Buddhist Sanskrit Texts 13. Darbhanga, India: Mithila Institute, 1970.
Sanskrit and translation into French: Sylvain Lévi. Mahāyānasūtrālaṃkāra, exposé de la doc-
trine du grand véhicule selon le système Yogācāra. 2 vols. Paris: Libraire Honoré Champion,
1907, 1911.
Principles of Explanation
vyākyhayukti
rnam par bshad pa’i rigs pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4061). TBRC W23703.136:59-270 (PDF
of Delhi, India: Delhi Kar-mapae choedhey, gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 5562, vol. 113.
The Thirty / Treatise on Cognition-Only in Thirty Stanzas
triṃśikākārikā / sarvavijñānamātradeśakatriṃśakakārikā
sum cu pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa / thams cad rnam rig tsam du ston pa sum cu pa’i tshig le’ur byas
pa
bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4055). TBRC W23703.213 (PDF of Delhi, India: Delhi Kar-mapae
choedhey, gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 5556, vol. 113
Sanskrit: Sylvain Lévi. Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi / Deux traités de Vasubandhu: Viṃśatikā (La
Vingtaine) et Triṃsikā (La Trentaine). Bibliotheque de l’École des Hautes Études. Paris:
Libraire Honoré Champion, 1925. Also: K. N. Chatterjee. Vijñapti-Mātratā-Siddhi (with
Sthiramati's Commentary). Varanasi, India: Kishor Vidya Niketan, 1980.
English translation: Stefan Anacker. Seven Works of Vasubandhu. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1984. Also: Thomas A. Kochumuttom. A Buddhist Doctrine of Experience. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1982.
The Twenty
viṃśatikā / viṃśikākārikā
nyi shu pa’i tshig le’ur byas pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4056). TBRC W23703.136:7-9 (PDF of
Delhi, India: Delhi Kar-mapae choedhey, gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 5557, vol. 113
Sanskrit: Sylvain Lévi. Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi / Deux traités de Vasubandhu: Viṃśatikā (La Vig-
taine) et Triṃsikā (La Trentaine). Bibliotheque de l’École des Hautes Études. Paris: Libraire

162 Bibliography of Works Cited
Honoré Champion, 1925.
English translation: Stefan Anacker. Seven Works of Vasubandhu. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass,
1984. Also: Thomas A. Kochumuttom. A Buddhist Doctrine of Experience. Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1982.
English translation (stanzas 1-10): Gregory A. Hillis. An Introduction and Translation of Vin-
itadeva’s Explanation of the First Ten Stanzas of [ Vasubandhu’s] Commentary on His
“Twenty Stanzas,” with Appended Glossary of Technical Terms. Ann Arbor, Mich.: Univer-
sity Microfilms, 1993.
Treasury of Manifest Knowledge
abhidharmakośa
chos mngon pa’i mdzod
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4089). TBRC W23703.140:3-51 (PDF of
Delhi, India: Delhi Kar-mapae choedhey, gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
Peking 5590, vol. 115
Sanskrit: Swami Dwarikadas Shastri. Abhidharmakośa and Bhāṣya of Ācārya Vasubandhu with
Sphuṭārtha Commentary of Ācārya Yaśomitra. Bauddha Bharati Series, 5. Banaras: Bauddha
Bharati, 1970. Also: P. Pradhan. Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam of Vasubandhu. Patna, India:
Jayaswal Research Institute, 1975.
French translation: Louis de La Vallée Poussin. L’Abhidharmakośa de Vasubandhu. 6 vols.
Brussels: Institut Belge des Hautes Études Chinoises, 1971.
English translation of the French: Leo M. Pruden. Abhidharmakośabhāṣyam. 4 vols. Berkeley,
Calif.: Asian Humanities Press, 1988.
Yashomitra (grags pa bshes gnyen)
Commentary on (Vasubandhu’s) Treasury of Knowledge
abhidharmakośaṭīkā
chos mngon pa’i mdzod kyi ’grel bshad
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4092). TBRC W23703.142:4-661(PDF
Peking 5591, vol. 115; Peking 5593, vol. 116
Sanskrit: Swami Dwarikadas Shastri. Ed. Abhidharmakośa & Bhāṣya of Ācārya Vasubandhu
with Sphuṭārtha Commentary of Ācārya Yaśomitra. Bauddha Bharati Series 5. Banaras, India:
Bauddha Bharati, 1970.
3. Works by Tibetan Authors
Ar Chang-chub-ye-shay (ar byang chub ye shes, early twelfth century)
Explanation of [Haribhadra’s] “Commentary on [Maitreya’s] 'Ornament for the Clear Realiza-
tions'“
mngon rtogs rgyan gyi ʼgrel pa rnam ʼbyed
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bkaʼ gdams gsung ʼbum phyogs bsgrigs. TBRC
W1PD89051.2:95-452. (PDF of si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2006).
Tibetan: Ar byang chub ye shes kyi gsung chos skor. Bkaʼ gdams dpe dkon gches btus, 2. Ed. Dpal
brtsegs bod yig dpe rnying zhib ʼjug khang. Beijing: Krong goʼi bod rig pa dpe skung khang,
2006.
Bu-tön Rin-chen-drub (bu ston rin chen grub, 1290-1364)
History of Buddhism in India
bde bar gshegs pa’i bstan pa’i gsal byed chos kyi ʼbyung gnas gsung rab rin po che’i mdzod /
rgya dkar chos ʼbyung.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (rin chen grub). TBRC W1934.24:619-1042 (PDF
of Lha-sa: zhol par khang, 2000).
Also, Krung go bod kyi shes rig dpe skun khang, 1988.
Cluster of Scriptures / Extensive Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realization,

Bibliography of Works Cited 163
Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom” as Well as Its Commentary.
mngon par rtogs paʼi rgyan zhes bya baʼi ʼgrel paʼi rgya cher bshad pa lung gi snye ma
In gsung ʼbum (rin chen grub). TBRC W1934.18:7-732 (PDF of Lha-sa: zhol par khang, 2000).
Also, Kagyud Relief and Protection Committee, 1979.
List of Textual Transmissions Recieved
bla ma dam pa rnams kyis rjes su bzung paʼi tshul bkaʼ drin rjes su dren pa byed pa.
In gsung ʼbum (rin chen grub). TBRC W1934.26:7-148 (PDF of Lha-sa: zhol par khang, 2000).
Chim Jam-pay-yang (mchims ’jam pa’i dbyangs or mchims nam mkha’ grags, died 1289 / 1290)
Commentary on [ Vasubandhu’s] “Treasury of Manifest Knowledge”: Ornament of Manifest
Knowledge
chos mngon mdzod kyi tshig le’ur byas pa’i ’grel pa mngon pa’i rgyan
Tibetan digital reprint edition: No TBRC entry found.
Buxaduor, India: Nang bstan shes rig ’dzin skyong slob gnyer khang, n.d.
Dol-po-pa Shay-rab-gyal-tshan (dol po pa shes rab rgyal mtshan, 1292-1361)
Explanation of Maitreya’s “Ornament for the Clear Realizations” for the Easy Realization of the
Meaning of the Sūtras.
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan zhes bya
ba’i rnam bshad mdo’i don bde blag tu rtog[s] pa.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: No TBRC entry found.
Tibetan. The ‘Dzam-Thang Edition of the Collected Works of Kun-Mkhyen Dol-po-pa Shes-
Rab-Rgyal-Mtshan, vol. 4 (Ma.), part two. Ed. M. Kapstein, 1992.
Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me (gung thang dkon mchog bstan pa’i sgron me, 1762-1823)
Beginnings of an Annotative Commentary on (Jam-yang-shay-pa’s) “Decisive Analysis on the First
Chapter of the ‘Perfection of Wisdom’”
phar phyin skabs dang poʼi mthaʼ dpyod kyi mchan ʼgrel rtsom ʼphro
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (dkon mchog bstan paʼi sgron me) TBRC
W1KG9408.3:139-326 (PDF of New Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1972-1975).
Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho/ A-khu Lo-drö-gya-tso (gung thang blo gros rgya mtsho/ a khu blo gros
rgya mtsho, 1851-1928/1930)
Annotations to (Haribhadra’s) Small Clear Meaning Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for
the Clear Realizations”: Clearing Away the Darkness for Those Wanting Liberation
mngon rtogs rgyan gyi ’grel chung don gsal ba’i mchan ’grel kun bzang zhing gi nyi ma thar
’dod mun sel
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In phar phyin (skabs gsum pa phyogs bsgrigs) TBRC
W30083.24–61 (PDF of lan kru’u: kan su’u mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2001).
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W00EGS1017126 (PDF of Lhasa?: dge ldan legs bshad
gsung rab ’grem spel khang, 2006.
Clarification of the Meaning of the Thought of the Two—the “Decisive Analysis on the Perfection
of Wisdom: Jewelled Lamp” by the Supreme Lama Jam-yang[-shay-pa] and the “Annotative
Commentary” by the Foremost Named Dipaṃ (Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me)
’jam dbyangs bla ma mchog gi phar phyin mthaʼ dpyod rin chen sgron me dang rje di paṃ mtshan
can gyi mchan ʼgrel gnyis kyi dgongs don gsal bar byed pa skal bzang ʼjug ngogs
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W1KG21227 (PDF of Kesang Thabkhes: Tibetan Colony,
Mundgod, Karnataka, 1982).
Gyal-tshab-dar-ma-rin-chen (rgyal tshab dar ma rin chen, 1364-1432)
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Sublime Continuum o f t h e Great Vehicle” / Commentary on
(Maitreya’s) “Treatise on the Later Scriptures of the Great Vehicle”
theg pa chen po rgyud bla ma’i ṭīkka
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (rgyal tshab rje). TBRC W22110.3:5-464 (PDF of
bkras lhun par rnying bskyar par ma, New Delhi, India: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1980-1981).
Collected Works of Rgyal-tshab Dar-ma-rin-chen, vol. 2 (entire). Delhi: Guru Deva, 1982. Also:
Collected Works of Rgyal-tshab Dar-ma-rin-chen, vol. 2 (entire). Delhi: Ngawang Gelek
Demo, 1981. Also: blockprint in the library of H.H. the Dalai Lama, no other data.

164 Bibliography of Works Cited
Explanation of (Āryadeva’s) “Four Hundred”: Essence of Eloquence
bzhi brgya pa’i rnam bshad legs bshad snying po
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W1KG4465. 1 vol (PDF of Sarnath, India: dge lugs dge
ldan dge slob khang, 1971).
Sarnath, India: Pleasure of Elegant Sayings Printing Press, 1971; also, n.d., blockprint in library
of HH the Dalai Lama
English translation: Yogic Deeds of Bodhisattvas: Gyel-tshap on Āryadeva’s Four Hundred.
Commentary by Geshe Sonam Rinchen, translated and edited by Ruth Sonam. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Snow Lion Publications, 1994.
Explanation of “Dharmakīrti's Commentary on (Dignāga’s) 'Compilation of Prime Cognition'“
Making Clear Without Mistakes the Path to Liberation
tshad ma rnam ʼgrel gyi tshig leʼur byas paʼi rnam bshad thar lam phyin ci ma log par gsal bar
byed pa / rnam ʼgrel thar lam gsal byed
Tibetan editions: In gsung ʼbum (rgyal tshab rje) TBRC W22110.5:207-392. (PDF of New
Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1980-1981).
Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations” and (Haribhadra’s) Commen-
tary: Ornament for the Essence
bstan bcos mngon par rtogs paʼi rgyan gyi rtsa ba dang deʼi ʼgrel pa don gsal dang bcas paʼi rnam
bshad snying poʼi rgyan
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (rgyal tshab rje). TBRC W1KG15935.2 (PDF of
[s.l.]: [s.n.], [2002].
Explanation of (Shāntideva’s) “Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds”: Entrance for Conqueror
Children
byang chub sems dpa’i spyod pa la ’jug pa’i rnam bshad rgyal sras ’jug ngog
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (gyal tshab rje). TBRC W29194.4:5-330. PDF of
Dharamsala: Sherig Parkhang, 1997).
Sarnath: Pleasure of Elegant Sayings Printing Press, 1973
Great Explanation of “(Dharmakīrti's) “Ascertainment of Valid Cognition”: Illumination of the
Thought
tshad ma rnam nges kyi TIk chen dgongs pa rab gsal
Tibetan editions: In gsung ʼbum (rgyal tshab rje). TBRC W22110.7:39-652 (PDF of New Delhi:
Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1980-1981).
Illumination of the Essential Meanings of (Nāgārjuna’s) “Precious Garland of the Middle Way”
dbu ma rin chen ’phreng ba’i snying po’i don gsal bar byed pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (rgyal tshab rje). TBRC W22110.1:353-508 (PDF
of New Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1980-1981).
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (rgyal tshab rje: sku ’bum par ma). TBRC
W23692.1:299 – 466 (PDF of sku ’bum byams pa gling par khang, [19-?]).
Collected Works, ka. Lhasa: zhol par khang, 15th rab ’byung in the fire rooster year, that is, 1897
(78 folios); also, Collected Works, ka. New Delhi: Guru Deva, 1982 (349-503, 78 folios),
“reproduced from a set of prints from the 1897 lha-sa old zhol (dga' ldan phun tshogs gling)
blocks.” [These are two separate editions.]
Illumination of the Path to Liberation / Explanation of (Dharmakīrti’s) Commentary on
(Dignāga’s) “Compilation of Prime Cognition”: Unerring Illumination of the Path to Liberation
thar lam gsal byed / tshad ma rnam ’grel gyi tshig le’ur byas pa’i rnam bshad thar lam phyin ci
ma log par gsal bar byed pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In tshad ma rnam ’grel gyi rnam bshad. TBRC W665:11-548
(PDF of zhang kang: zhang kang then ma dpe skrun kung zi, 2000).
Collected Works of Rgyal-tshab Dar-ma-rin-chen, vol. 6 (entire). Delhi: Guru Deva, 1982. Also:
Collected Works of Rgyal-tshab Dar-ma-rin-chen, vol. 6 (entire). Delhi: Ngawang Gelek
Demo, 1981. Also: Varanasi, India: Pleasure of Elegant Sayings Press, 1974.
Notes [on Tsong-kha-pa’s Teachings] on the Eight Difficult Topics
dka’ gnas brgyad kyi zin bris rje’i gsung bzhin brjed byang du bkod pa

Bibliography of Works Cited 165
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (tsong kha pa). TBRC W22273.15:623-658 (PDF
of bla brang: bla brang bkra shis ’khyil, [199?]).
Hel-ha Tan-pay-drön-may (hal ha chos mdzad bla ma bstan pa'i sgron me, ca. 20th century)
Annotations to (Jam-yang-shay-pa’s) “Decisive Analysis of (Maitreya’s) 'Ornament for the Clear
Realizations'”
kun mkhyen ʼjam dbyangs bzhad pa phar phyin gyi yig chaʼi mchan ʼgel gser gyi sde mig
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In hal ha chos mdzad bla ma. TBRC W2CZ8020.1 (PDF of New
Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1980-1981).
Jam-yang-shay-pa Ngag-wang-tson-drü ('jam dbyangs bzhad pa’i rdo rje ngag dbang brtson grus,
1648-1721/1722)
Decisive Analysis of (Maitreya's) "Ornament for the Clear Realizations": Precious Lamp Illumi-
nating All the Topics of the Perfection of Wisdom
bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi mtha' dpyod shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i don kun
gsal ba'i rin chen sgron me
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC P423. (PDF of New York: TBRC, 2011).
Eloquent Presentation of the Eight Categories and Seventy Topics: Sacred Word of Guru Ajita
dngos po brgyad don bdun cu’i rnam bzhag legs par bshad pa mi pham bla ma'i zhal lung
Tibetan editions:
1973 Ngawang Gelek bla brang: Collected Works of ’Jam-dbyaṅs-bźad-pa’i-rdo-rje, vol.
15. New Delhi, India: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1973.
1987 Go-mang Lhasa (first printing): don bdun cu'i mtha' spyod mi pham bla ma'i zhal lung
gsal ba'i legs bshad blo gsal mgul rgyan. 1a-20a. Go-mang College: Lha-sa, Tibet: n.d.
(PDF of complete printing available at UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies,
http://www.uma-tibet.org.)
1987 Go-mang Lhasa (second printing): don bdun cu'i mtha' spyod mi pham bla ma'i zhal
lung gsal ba'i legs bshad blo gsal mgul rgyan. 3a-20a. Go-mang College: Lha-sa, Tibet:
n.d. (PDF of incomplete printing available at UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies,
http://www.uma-tibet.org.)
1995 Mundgod revision of Ngawang Gelek bla brang: Collected Works of ’Jam-dbyaṅs-
bźad-pa’i-rdo-rje, vol. 16. New Delhi, India: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1995.
1999 Mundgod: dngos po brgyad don bdun cu’i rnam gzhag legs par bshad pa mi pham bla
ma’i zhal lung. In don bdun cu dang sa lam sogs nyer mkho'i skor phyogs bsgrigs: 1-55.
Mundgod, India: Dre-pung Gomang Library, 1999.
1999 Tōyō Bunko CD-ROM: “Tibetan texts of don bdun bcu of ’jam dbyangs bzhad pa and
rigs lam ’phrul gyi lde mig of dkon mchog bstan pa'i sgron me.” In the Toyo Bunko Da-
tabase CD Release II. Tokyo, Japan: Tōyō Bunko, 1999. CD-ROM. (This edition is based
on the 1999 Mundgod.)
2001 Kan su’u: dngos po brgyad don bdun cu’i rnam gzhag legs par bshad pa mi pham bla
ma’i zhal lung. In don bdun cu dang sa lam sogs nyer mkho'i skor phyogs bsgrigs: 88-
146. Kan su'u, China: mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2005.
2005 Mundgod: dngos po brgyad don bdun cu’i rnam gzhag legs par bshad pa mi pham bla
ma’i zhal lung. In don bdun cu dang sa lam sogs nyer mkho'i skor phyogs bsgrigs: 1-67.
Mundgod, India: Dre-pung Gomang Library, 2005.
2011 TBRC bla brang: In gsung ’bum (’jam dbyangs bzhad pa) TBRC W22186.14:115-
178 (PDF of bla brang bkra shis ’khyil: bla brang brka shis ’khyil dgon, publishing date
unknown).
English translation: Jeffrey Hopkins and Jongbok Yi. The Hidden Teaching of the Perfection of
Wisdom Sūtras: Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Seventy Topics and Kön-chog-jig-may-wang-po’s 173
Topics. Dyke, VA: UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies, 2014: downloadable at uma-tibet.org.
Great Exposition of the Interpretable and the Definitive / Decisive Analysis of (Tsong-kha-pa’s)
“Differentiating the Interpretable and the Definitive”: Storehouse of White Lapis-Lazuli of
Scripture and Reasoning Free from Mistake, Fulfilling the Hopes of the Fortunate

166 Bibliography of Works Cited
drang ba dang nges pa'i don rnam par ’byed pa'i mtha' dpyod ’khrul bral lung rigs bai dūr dkar
pa'i ngan mdzod skal bzang re ba kun skong
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W22186.10:1-288 (PDF of bla brang bkra shis ’khyil, bla
brang brka shis ’khyil dgon, publishing date unknown).
English translation of the section on the four reliances: William Magee. Principles for Practice:
Jam-yang-shay-pa on the Four Reliances with Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s Annotations. UMA In-
stitute for Tibetan Studies, uma-tibet.org.
Great Exposition of Tenets / Explanation of “Tenets”: Sun of the Land of Samantabhadra Bril-
liantly Illuminating All of Our Own and Others’ Tenets and the Meaning of the Profound [Emp-
tiness], Ocean of Scripture and Reasoning Fulf illing All Hopes of All Beings
grub mtha’ chen mo / grub mtha’i rnam bshad rang gzhan grub mtha’ kun dang zab don mchog
tu gsal ba kun bzang zhing gi nyi ma lung rigs rgya mtsho
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In grub mtha’i rnam bshad kun bzang zhing gi nyi ma. TBRC
W00KG09694:34-973 (PDF of lan kru'u: kan su'u mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1994).
Also: Collected Works of ’Jam-dbyaṅs-bźad-pa’i-rdo-rje, vol. 14 (entire); Musoorie, India:
Dalama, 1962; New Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1973; Mundgod, India: Drepung
Gomang Library, 1999.
English translation (entire root text and edited portions of the autocommentary and Ngag-wang-
pal-dan’s Annotations): Jeffrey Hopkins. Maps of the Profound: Jam-yang-shay-ba’s Great
Exposition of Buddhist and Non-Buddhist Views on the Nature of Reality. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow
Lion Publications, 2003.
English translation (beginning of the chapter on the Consequence School): Jeffrey Hopkins.
Meditation on Emptiness, 581-697. London: Wisdom Publications, 1983; rev. ed., Boston:
Wisdom Publications, 1996.
English translation of root text with Lo-sang-kön-chog’s commentary: Daniel Cozort and Craig
Preston. Buddhist Philosophy: Losang Gonchok's Short Commentary to Jamyang Shayba's
Root Text on Tenets. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2003.
Translation of the section of the distinctive tenets of the Consequence School: Daniel Cozort,
Unique Tenets of the Middle Way Consequence School (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 1998).
Great Exposition of the Middle / Decisive Analysis of (Chandrakīrti’s) “Supplement to (Nāgār-
juna’s) ‘Treatise on the Middle’”: Treasury of Scripture and Reasoning, Thoroughly Illuminat-
ing the Profound Meaning [of Emptiness], Entrance for the Fortunate
dbu ma chen mo / dbu ma ’jug pa’i mtha’ dpyod lung rigs gter mdzod zab don kun gsal skal
bzang ’jug ngogs
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (’jam dbyangs bzhad pa'i rdo rje). TBRC
W21503.9:11-894 (PDF of South India: Gomang College, 1997?).
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (ʼjam dbyangs bzhad pa). bla brang bkra shis
ʼkhyil: bla brang brka shis ʼkhyil dgon, publishing date unknown. Also available at: TBRC
W22186.14.
Collected Works of ’Jam-dbyaṅs-bźad-pa’i-rdo-rje, vol. 9 (entire). New Delhi: Ngawang Gelek
Demo, 1973. Also available at: TBRC W1KG9409.9.
Buxaduor, India: Gomang, 1967.
Collected Works of ’Jam-dbyaṅs-bźad-pa’i-rdo-rje, vol. 9. (entire). Mundgod, India: Gomang
College, 1997. Also available at: TBRC W21503.9.
Beijing, China: Pe cin yug hran shin 'gyig par khang, 2004.
Mundgod, Karnataka, India: Drepung Gomang Library, 2007.
Translation of the section on the two truths: Guy M. Newland’s Ph.D. thesis, The Two truths: A
study of Mādhyamika philosophy as presented in the Monastic textbooks of the Ge-luk-ba
order of Tibetan Buddhism.
Translation of the beginning: Jules Levinson, What Does Chandrakīrti Add to Nāgārjuna’s Trea-
tise? UMA Translation Project Publication, 2015. http://uma-tibet.org.
Illuminating a Little the Presentation of Awareness and Knowledge: Beautiful Golden Garland of
Eloquence

Bibliography of Works Cited 167
blo rig gi rnam bzhag nyung gsal legs bshad gser gyi ’phreng mdzes
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (’jam dbyangs bzhad pa'i rdo rje). TBRC
W22186.14:305-376 (PDF of bla brang bkra shis ’khyil: bla brang bkra shis ’khyil dgon,
[n.d.]).
Illuminating a Little the Presentation of Signs and Reasonings: Beautiful Golden Garland of Elo-
quence
rtags rigs kyi rnam bzhag nyung gsal legs bshad gser gyi ’phreng mdzes
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (’jam dbyangs bzhad pa'i rdo rje). TBRC
W22186.14:176-304 (PDF of bla brang bkra shis ’khyil: bla brang bkra shis ’khyil dgon,
[n.d.]).
Jay-tsün Chö-kyi-gyal-tshan (rje btsun chos kyi rgyal mtshan, 1469-1546)
Excellent Means Definitely Revealing the Eight Categories and Seventy Topics, the Topics of (Mait-
reya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the
Clear Realizations,” the Stainless Oral Transmission of Jay-tsun-chö-kyi-gyal-tshan
bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi brjod bya dngos brgyad don bdun cu nges par ’byed
pa’i thabs dam pa rje btsun chos kyi rgyal mtshan gyi gsung rgyun dri ma med pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: Indian block-print, n.d.
dngos po brgyad don bdun cu’i rnam gzhag
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In don bdun cu dang sa lam sogs nyer mkho'i skor phyogs bsgrigs.
TBRC W30307.11-54. (PDF of Llan kruʼu: kan su’u mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2001).
Rje btsun pa’i Don bdun cu: An Introduction to the Abhisamayālaṅkāra
Edited with Introduction by Shunzō Onoda.
Kyoto, Japan: The Association of Indian and Buddhist Studies, Nagoya University, 1983.
Good Explanation Clarifying the Difficult Points in the Two Commentaries on (Maitreya’s) “Or-
nament for the Clear Realizations”: Sea of the Fortunate Dragon Kings/ General Meaning of
(Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations” and (Haribhadra’s) Commentary: Orna-
ment for the Essence: The Sea.
mngon par rtogs paʼi rgyan gyi ’grel pa rnam pa gnyis kyi dka’ ba’i gnas gsal bar byed pa legs
bshad skal bzang klu dbang gi rol mtsho/ rgyan ’grel spyi don rol mtsho
TBRC W1KG11733 (PDF of dgaʼ ldan par khang, 1986).
Excellent Means Definitely Revealing the Eight Categories and Seventy Topics, the Topics of (Mait-
reya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the
Clear Realizations,” the Stainless Oral Transmission of Jay-tsun-chö-kyi-gyal-tshan
bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan gyi brjod bya dngos brgyad don bdun cu nges par ’byed
pa’i thabs dam pa rje btsun chos kyi rgyal mtshan gyi gsung rgyun dri ma med pa
Indian block-print, n.d.
dngos po brgyad don bdun cu’i rnam gzhag. In don bdun cu dang sa lam sogs nyer mkho'i skor
phyogs bsgrigs bzhugs so: 1-44. (PDF of kan suʼu, China: mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2005).
Rje btsun pa’i Don bdun cu: An Introduction to the Abhisamayālaṅkāra. Edited with Introduc-
tion by Shunzō Onoda Kyoto, Japan: The Association of Indian and Buddhist Studies, Nagoya
University, 1983.
Khay-drub-ge-leg-pal-sang (mkhas grub dge legs dpal bzang, 1385-1438)
Compilation on Emptiness / Opening the Eyes of the Fortunate: Treatise Brilliantly Clarifying the
Profound Emptiness
stong thun chen mo / zab mo stong pa nyid rab tu gsal bar byed pa’i bstan bcos skal bzang mig
’byed
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W1KG15939. 1 vol (PDF of Lha sa: ser gtsug nang bstan
dpe rnying ’tshol bsdu phyogs sgrig khang , 2009).
Collected Works of the Lord Mkhas-grub rje dge-legs-dpal-bzaṅ-po, vol. 1, 179-702 (edition
cited). New Delhi: Guru Deva, 1980. Also: Collected Works of Mkhas-grub dge-legs dpal,
vol. 1, 125-482. New Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1983. Also: New Delhi: n.p., 1972.
English translation: José Ignacio Cabezún. A Dose of Emptiness: An Annotated Translation of
the stong thun chen mo of mKhas grub dGe legs dpal bzang, 21-388. Albany, N.Y.: State

168 Bibliography of Works Cited
University of New York Press, 1992.
English translation of the chapter on the Mind-Only School: Jeffrey Hopkins. Khay-drub-ge-leg-
pal-sang’s “Opening the Eyes of the Fortunate”: The Mind-Only School. Unpublished man-
uscript.
Extensive Explanation of (Dharmakīrti’s) “Commentary on (Dignāga’s) ‘Compilation of Prime
Cognition’”: Ocean of Reasoning
tshad ma rnam ’grel gyi rgya cher bshad pa rigs pa'i rgya mtsho
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W1KG10279, vol. 10 (tha), 623-1006 (PDF of bla brang
bkra shis ’khyil par khang edition, 199?).
Extensive Commentary on the Worldly Realm Chapter of (Kalkī Puṇḍarīka’s) “Stainless Light”
dri med ʼod gyi dkaʼ gnas kyi zin bris rgyal ba tsong kha paʼi gsung bzhin mkhas grub rin po
ches brjed byang du mdzad pa shin tu rnyed dkaʼ ba.
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (mkhas grub rje) TBRC W29195.4:765-918 (PDF
of Dharamsala: Sherig Parkhang, 1997).
Also: In Collected Works of the Lord Mkhas-grub rje dge-legs-dpal-bzaṅ-po, vol. 2 (kha), 97-
1114. New Delhi: Guru Deva, 1980; Collected Works of the Lord Mkhas-grub rje dge-legs-
dpal-bzaṅ-po, vol. 4 (ga), 3-628. New Delhi: Guru Deva, 1980. TBRC: W29195-5153, 5154,
Extensive Explanation of the General Presentation of the Tantra Sets
rgyud sde spyiʼi rnam par bzhag pa rgyas par bshad pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (mkhas grub rje) TBRC W29195.7:221-374 (PDF
of Dharamsala: Sherig Parkhang, 1997).
Also Collected Works of the Lord Mkhas-grub rje dge-legs-dpal-bzaṅ-po, vol. 8, 443-630. New
Delhi: Guru Deva, 1980.
Also: Collected Works of Mkhas-grub dge-legs dpal, vol. 11, 215-368. New Delhi: Ngawang
Gelek Demo, 1983.
Ornament for the Set of Seven Valid Cognition Treatises Dispelling Mental Darkness / Ornament
for the Seven Treatises
tshad ma sde bdun gyi rgyan yid kyi mun sel
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (mkhas grub rje) TBRC W29195.8:395-778 (PDF
of Dharamsala: Sherig Parkhang, 1997).
Mu-ge-sam-tan (bsam gtan rgya mtsho/dmu dge bsam gtan, 1914-1993)
A Beautiful Garland of Glosses for the Stanzas in Jam-pal-yang-shay-pay-dor-je’s “Decisive Anal-
ysis of the Perfection of Wisdom”
ʼjam dpal dbyangs dngos bzhad paʼi rdo rjeʼi phar phyin mthaʼ dpyod kyi snyan ngag gi tshigs
bcad rnams kyi tshig ʼgrel me tog ʼphreng mdzes
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (bsam gtan rgya mtsho) TBRC
W00KG08362.2:21-198. (PDF of Zi ling: mtsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1997), and
W1PD96997.2:23-25 (PDF of Khreng tuʼu: si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2009).
Ngag-wang-pal-dan (ngag dbang dpal ldan, b. 1797), also known as Pal-dan-chö-jay (dpal ldan chos
rje)
Annotations for (Jam-yang-shay-pa’s) “Great Exposition of Tenets”: Freeing the Knots of the Dif-
f icult Points, Precious Jewel of Clear Thought
grub mtha’ chen mo’i mchan ’grel dka’ gnad mdud grol blo gsal gces nor
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (nga dbang dpal ldan). TBRC W5926,177. 3-356
(Delhi, India: Mongolian Lama Gurudeva, 1983).
Sarnath, India: Pleasure of Elegant Sayings Press, 1964. Also: Collected Works of Chos-rje ṅag-
dbaṅ Dpal-ldan of Urga, vols. 4 (entire)-5, 1-401. Delhi: Guru Deva, 1983.
Explanation of (Maitreya’s) Treatise “Ornament for the Clear Realizations” from the Approach of
the Meaning of the Words: Sacred Word of Maitreyanātha
bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan tshig don gyi sgo nas bshad pa byams mgon zhal lung
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W5926-3:221-416 (PDF of: Delhi: Gurudeva, 1983).
English translations:

Bibliography of Works Cited 169
Hopkins, Jeffrey and Jongbok Yi. Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s Explanation of the Treatise “Orna-
ment for the Clear Realizations” From the Approach of the Meaning of the Words: The
Sacred Word of Maitreyanātha. Dyke, VA: UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies, 2014:
downloadable at uma-tibet.org.
―――. (containing 203 of the 274 stanzas) The Hidden Teaching of the Perfection of Wis-
dom Sūtras: Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Seventy Topics and Kön-chog-jig-may-wang-po’s 173
Topics. Dyke, VA: UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies, 2014: downloadable at uma-ti-
bet.org.
Ngog Lo-dan-shay-rab (rngog blo ldan shes rab, 1057-1109)
Topical Summary of the “Treatise of Instruction on the Perfection of Wisdom, Ornament for the
Clear Realizations”, / Topical Summary
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan gyi Tīk chung
zhes bya ba / bsdus don
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W00EGS1017184. 1 vols. [s.l.]: [s.n.], [1998?].
Tibetan: Phar phyin gyi skor: gces btsus kyi gzhung gsum. Bod kyi gtsub lag gces btus pod phreng
16. New Delhi: bod kyi gtsug lag zhib dpyod khang (Institute of Tibetan Classics), 2011, pp. 1-
121.
Paṇ-chen Sö-nam-drag-pa (paṇ chen bsod nams grags pa, 1478-1554)
General-Meaning Commentary on the Perfection of Wisdom/ Good Explanation of the Meaning of
(Gyal-tshab’s) “Explanation Illuminating the Meaning of the Commentaries on (Maitreya’s)
‘Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom, Ornament for the Clear
Realizations’: Ornament for the Essence”: Lamp Illuminating the Meaning of the Mother.
shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan ’grel pa
dang bcas pa’i rnam bshad snying po rgyan gyi don legs par bshad pa yum don gsal ba’i sgron
me/ mngon rtogs rgyan gyi ʼgrel pa yum don gsal baʼ'i sgron me/ phar phyin spyi don/
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (bsod nams grags pa) TBRC W23828.3:9-510
(PDF of Mundgod, Karnataka: Drepung Loseling Library Society, 1982-1990).
Also Buxaduor: Nang bstan shes rig ’dzin skyong slob gnyer khang, 1963
Decisive Analysis of the Perfection of Wisdom/Decisive Analysis for (my) “Lamp Illuminating the
Meaning of the Mother” Clearly Explaining with Intelligence the Meaning of (Gyal-tshab’s)
“Explanation Illuminating the Meaning of (Maitreya’s) ‘Treatise of Quintessential Instructions
on the Perfection of Wisdom, Ornament for the Clear Realizations’ and (Haribhadra’s) Com-
mentary
rnam bshad snying po rgyan gyi don rigs lam bzhin du gsal bar 'chad pa'i yum don yang gsal
sgron me'i mtha' dpyod / phar phyin mtha' dpyod
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (bsod nams grags pa) TBRC W23828.3-5 (PDF
of Mundgod, Karnataka: Drepung Loseling Library Society, 1982-1990).
Ren-da-wa Shön-nu-lo-drö (red mdaʼ ba gzhon nu blo gros, 1349-1412)
Commentary on (Chandrakīrti’s Supplement to Nāgārjunaʼs) Root Stanzas on the Middle Way, Il-
luminating Correctness
dbu ma rtsa baʼi ʼgrel pa ʼthad paʼi snang ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (gzhon nu blo gros) TBRC W23629.2:155-478
(PDF of Kathmandu: Sa skya rgyal yongs gsung rab slob gnyer khang , 1999).
Rong-tön-Shay-ja-kun-rig (rong ston shes bya kun rig / śākya rgyal mtshan, 1367-1449)
Explanation Making Clear the Meaning of the Words of (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary” on (Mait-
reya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations'“
mngon rtogs rgyan gyi ʼgrel paʼ'i rnam bshad tshig don rab gsal
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (shes bya kun rig) TBRC W28942.3:3-774 (PDF
of skye dgu mdo: gangs ljongs rig rgyan gsung rab par khang, 2004).
Moonlight of the Profound Essential Topics that Differentiates the Difficult Points in (Maitreya’s)
“Ornament for the Clear Realizations” and (Haribhadra’s) “Commentary”:
mngon par rtogs paʼi rgyan ʼgrel pa dang bcas paʼi dkaʼ baʼi gnas rnam par ʼbyed pa zab don
gnad kyi zla ʼod

170 Bibliography of Works Cited
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (shes bya kun rig) TBRC W1PD83960.4:11-265
khren tu'u: si khron dpe skrun tshogs pa/ si khron mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 2008.
Sa-kya Pandita Kun-ga-gyal-tshan (sa skya paṇḍi ta kun dgaʼ rgyal mtshan, 1182-1251)
Differentiation of the Three Codes
sdom gsum rab dbye
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In sdom gsum rab dbye dang sdom gsum gtan ʼbebs ʼjam dbyangs
bla maʼi dgongs rgyan gyi rnam ʼgrel. TBRC W29981.1:31-157. (PDF of Pe cin: mi rigs dpe
skrun khang, 2004).
English: Jared Douglas Rhoton. A Clear Differentiation of the Three Codes. Essential Distinc-
tions among the Individual Liberation, Great Vehicle and Tantric Systems. The sDom gsum
rab dbye and Six Letters. Sakya Pandita Kunga Gyaltshen. SUNY series in Buddhist Studies.
Matthew Kapstein, editor. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2002.
Shākya-chok-den (gser mdog paṇ chen shakya mchog ldan legs pa’i blo gros, 1428–1507)
Garland of Waves
Shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan zhes bya
ba’i ’grel pa dang bcas pa’i snga phyi’i ’brel rnam par btsal zhing dngos bstan gyi dka’ ba’i
gnas la legs par bshad pa’i dpung tshogs rnam par bkod pa / bzhed tshul rba rlabs kyi phreng
ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (shākya mchog ldan). TBRC W23200.11:163-594
(PDF of New Delhi: Nagwang Topgyel, 1995).
Kunzang Tobgey ed., 1975.
Ocean of Play
Shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par rtogs pa’i rgyan ’grel pa
dang bcas pa’i dka’ ba’i gnas rnam bar bshad nas rang bzhan gyi grub pa’i mtha’ rnam par
dbye ba lung rigs kyi rol mtsho
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (shākya mchog ldan). TBRC W23200.1:19-576
(PDF of New Delhi: Nagwang Topgyel, 1995).
Kunzang Tobgey ed., 1975
Shön-nu-pal (gzhon nu dpal/'gos lo tsa ba, 1392-1481)
Blue Annals
deb ther sngon po
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In deb ther sngon po. TBRC W7494.1:3-58 (PDF of New Delhi:
International Academy of Indian Culture).
English translation: Roerich, George. Blue Annals. Calcutta, 1949; reprint ed., Delhi: Motilal
Banarsidass, 1976.
Tsong-kha-pa Blo-bzang-grags-pa (or Tsong-kha-pa Lo-sang-drag-pa, 1357-1419)
Explanation of (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”: Ocean of Reasoning / Great Commentary
on (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise on the Middle”
dbu ma rtsa ba’i tshig le’ur byas pa shes rab ces bya ba’i rnam bshad rigs pa’i rgya mtsho / rtsa
shes ṭik chen
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (tsong kha pa, bla brang par ma). TBRC
W22273.15:5-622 (PDF of bla brang: bla brang bkra shis ’khyil, [199?]).
Peking 6153, vol. 156.
Also: Sarnath, India: Pleasure of Elegant Sayings Printing Press, n.d. Also: rJe tsong kha pa’i
gsung dbu ma’i lta ba’i skor, vols. 1-2. Sarnath, India: Pleasure of Elegant Sayings Press,
1975. Also: Delhi: Ngawang Gelek, 1975. Also: Delhi: Guru Deva, 1979.
English translation: Geshe Ngawang Samten and Jay L. Garfield. Ocean of Reasoning: A Great
Commentary on Nāgārjuna’s Mūlamadhyamakakārikā. Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2006.
English translation (chap. 2): Jeffrey Hopkins. Ocean of Reasoning. Dharmsala, India: Library
of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1974.
Extensive Explanation of (Chandrakīrti’s) “Supplement to (Nāgārjuna’s) ‘Treatise on the Mid-

Bibliography of Works Cited 171
dle’”: Illumination of the Extensive Explanation of (Chandrakīrti’s) “Supplement to (Nāgār-
juna’s) ‘Treatise on the Middle’”: Illumination of the Thought
dbu ma la ’jug pa’i rgya cher bshad pa dgongs pa rab gsal
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (tsong kha pa, bla brang par ma). TBRC
W22273.16:5-582 (PDF of bla brang: bla brang bkra shis ’khyil, [199?]).
Peking 6143, vol. 154.
Also: Dharmsala, India: Tibetan Cultural Printing Press, n.d.; Sarnath, India: Pleasure of Elegant
Sayings Press, 1973; Delhi: Ngawang Gelek, 1975; Delhi: Guru Deva, 1979.
English translation (chaps. 1-5): Jeffrey Hopkins. Compassion in Tibetan Buddhism, 93-230.
Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1980; the portion of the book that is Tsong-kha-pa’s
Illumination of the Thought (chapters 1-5) is downloadable at:
http://uma-tibet.org/edu/gomang/dbu_ma/middle.php.
English translation (chap. 6, stanzas 1-7): Jeffrey Hopkins and Anne C. Klein. Path to the Mid-
dle: Madhyamaka Philosophy in Tibet: The Oral Scholarship of Kensur Yeshay Tupden, by
Anne C. Klein, 147-183, 252-271. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1994.
Four Interwoven Annotations on (Tsong-kha-pa’s) “Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path” /
The Lam rim chen mo of the incomparable Tsong-kha-pa, with the interlineal notes of Ba-so
Chos-kyi-rgyal-mtshan, Sde-drug Mkhan-chen Ngag-dbang-rab-rtan, ’Jam-dbyangs-bshad-
pa’i-rdo-rje, and Bra-sti Dge-bshes Rin-chen-don-grub
lam rim mchan bzhi sbrags ma/ mnyam med rje btsun tsong kha pa chen pos mdzad pa’i byang
chub lam rim chen mo’i dka’ ba’i gnad rnams mchan bu bzhi’i sgo nas legs par bshad pa theg
chen lam gyi gsal sgron
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In lam rim mchan bzhi sbrags ma (bla brang bkra shis ’khyil par
ma). TBRC W29037.1:3- 978 (PDF of bla brang bkra shis ’khyil edition printed from the
1807 bla brang bkra shis 'khyil blocks in 1999?).
Also: New Delhi: Chos-’phel-legs-ldan, 1972
Golden Garland of Eloquence / Extensive Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Treatise of Quintessential
Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom: Ornament for the Clear Realizations” as Well as Its
Commentaries: Golden Garland of Eloquence
legs bshad gser ’phreng / shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon par
rtogs pa’i rgyan ’grel pa dang bcas pa’i rgya cher bshad pa legs bshad gser gyi phreng ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung 'bum/ tsong kha pa (bkra shis lhun po par rnying). TBRC
W29193.18:5-580 (PDF of Dharamsala: Sherig Parkhang, 1997. Also TBRC W22109.3219
(PDF of gedan sungrab minyam gyunphel series, Ngawang Gelek Demo, 1977).
English translation: Sparham, Gareth. Golden Garland of Eloquence: legs bshad gser phreng, 4
vols. Fremont, CA: Jain Publishing Company, 2008-2010.
Great Exposition of Secret Mantra / The Stages of the Path to a Conqueror and Pervasive Master,
a Great Vajradhara: Revealing All Secret Topics
sngags rim chen mo / rgyal ba khyab bdag rdo rje ’chang chen po’i lam gyi rim pa gsang ba kun
gyi gnad rnam par phye ba
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W2CZ7854. 1 vols. (PDF of Lhasa: dpal ldan, date un-
known).
Peking 6210, vol. 161. Also: Delhi: Ngawang Gelek, 1975. Also: Delhi: Guru Deva, 1979.
English translation (chap. 1): H.H. the Dalai Lama, Tsong-kha-pa, and Jeffrey Hopkins. Tantra
in Tibet. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1977; reprint, with minor corrections, Ithaca,
N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1987.
English translation (chaps. 2-3): H.H. the Dalai Lama, Tsong-kha-pa, and Jeffrey Hopkins. The
Yoga of Tibet. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1981; reprinted as Deity Yoga. Ithaca, N.Y.:
Snow Lion Publications, 1987.
English translation (chap. 4): H.H. the Dalai Lama, Dzong-ka-ba, and Jeffrey Hopkins. Yoga
Tantra: Paths to Magical Feats. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2005.
Great Exposition of the Stages of the Path / Stages of the Path to Enlightenment Thoroughly Teach-
ing All the Stages of Practice of the Three Types of Beings

172 Bibliography of Works Cited
lam rim chen mo / skyes bu gsum gyi nyams su blang ba’i rim pa thams cad tshang bar ston pa’i
byang chub lam gyi rim pa
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (tsong kha pa, bla brang par ma). TBRC
W22273.13:51026 (PDF of bla brang: bla brang bkra shis ’khyil, [199?]).
Peking 6001, vol. 152.
Dharmsala, India: Tibetan Cultural Printing Press, 1964.
Delhi: Ngawang Gelek, 1975. Also: Delhi: Guru Deva, 1979.
Edited Tibetan: Tsultrim Kelsang Khangkar. The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to
Enlightenment (Lam Rim Chen Mo). Japanese and Tibetan Buddhist Culture Series, 6. Kyoto:
Tibetan Buddhist Culture Association, 2001.
English translation: Lamrim Chenmo Translation Committee. The Great Treatise on the Stages
of the Path to Enlightenment. 3 vols. Joshua W.C. Cutler, editor-in-chief, Guy Newland, edi-
tor. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2000-2004.
English translation of the part on the excessively broad object of negation: Elizabeth Napper.
Dependent-Arising and Emptiness, 153-215. London: Wisdom Publications, 1989.
English translation of the part on the excessively narrow object of negation: William Magee. The
Nature of Things: Emptiness and Essence in the Geluk World, 179-192. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow
Lion Publications, 1999.
English translation of the parts on calm abiding and special insight: Alex Wayman. Calming the
Mind and Discerning the Real, 81-431. New York: Columbia University Press, 1978; reprint,
New Delhi, Motilal Banarsidass, 1979.
Introduction to the Seven Treatises on Prime Cognition: Clearing Away the Mental Darkness of
Seekers
sde bdun la ’jug pa’i sgo don gnyer yid kyi mun sel
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W1KG4466. 1 vol (PDF of Sarnath, India: dge ldan spyi
las khang, 1972).
sde dge, 5416.
New Zhol Par-khang edition of the collected works of Tsong-kha-pa, Vol. tsha.
Medium-Length Exposition of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment to be Practiced by Beings of
the Three Capacities / Medium-Length Exposition of the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment to
be Practiced by Beings of the Three Capacities together with an Outline / Short Exposition of
the Stages of the Path to Enlightenment
skyes bu gsum gyis nyams su blang ba’i byang chub lam gyi rim pa / skyes bu gsum gyi nyams
su blang ba’i byang chub lam gyi rim pa bring po sa bcad kha skong dang bcas pa / lam rim
’bring / lam rim chung ngu
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (tsong kha pa, bla brang par ma). TBRC
W22273.14:5-474 (PDF of bla brang: bla brang bkra shis ’khyil, 199?);
Peking 6002, vol. 152-153.
Also: Mundgod, India: dga’ ldan shar rtse, n.d. (includes outline of topics by Trijang Rin-
bochay); Bylakuppe, India: Sera Je Library, 1999 (includes outline of topics by Trijang
Rinbochay); Dharmsala, India: Tibetan Cultural Printing Press, 1968; Delhi: Ngawang
Gelek, 1975. Also: Delhi: Guru Deva, 1979.
English translation of the section on special insight:
Jeffrey Hopkins. In Tsong-kha-pa’s Final Exposition of Wisdom. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion
Publications, 2008.
Robert Thurman. “The Middle Transcendent Insight.” Life and Teachings of Tsong Khapa,
108-185. Dharmsala, India: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1982.
Edited Tibetan text and Japanese translation of the section on special insight: Tsultrim Kelsang
Khangkar and Takada Yorihito. A Study of Tsong khapa’s Mādhyamika Philosophy 1: Anno-
tated Japanese translation of the Vipaśyanā Section of Medium Exposition of the Stages of
the Path (Lam rim). Tsong kha pa chuugan tetsugaku no kenkyuu 1, Bodaidousidairon
chuuhen, kan no shou: wayaku, Tsultrim Kelsang Khangkar and Takada Yorihito, Kyoto:
Buneido, 1996.

Bibliography of Works Cited 173
Japanese translation: Tsultrim Kelsang Khangkar and Takashi Rujinaka. The Treatise on the
Stages of the Path to Enlightenment by rJe Tsong kha pa: An Annotated Japanese Translation
of Byang chub Lam rim chung ba. Kyoto: Unio Corporation, 2005.
Praise of Dependent-Arising / Praise of the Supramundane Victor Buddha from the Approach of
His Teaching the Profound Dependent-Arising: The Essence of Eloquence / Praise of the Supra-
mundane Buddha from the Viewpoint of Dependent-Arising
rten ’brel bstod pa / sang rgyas bcom ldan ’das la zab mo rten cing ’brel bar ’byung ba gsung
ba’i sgo nas bstod pa legs par bshad pa’i snying po
Tibetan digital reprint edition: TBRC W8LS16232 (no publication data).
Peking 6016, vol. 153. Also: Delhi: Ngawang Gelek, 1975. Also: Delhi: Guru Deva, 1979.
English translation: Geshe Wangyal. The Door of Liberation, 175-186. New York: Maurice
Girodias Associates, 1973; reprint, New York: Lotsawa, 1978; rev. ed., Boston: Wisdom,
1995. Also: Robert Thurman. Life and Teachings of Tsong Khapa, 99-107. Dharmsala, India:
Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1982.
Response to My Spiritual Friend Chang-chup-la-ma's Question
bshes gnyen chen po byang chub bla maʼi dris lan
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (tsong kha pa). TBRC W29193.2:555-570. (PDF
of Dharamsala: Sherig Parkhang, 1997).
The Lord [Gyal-tshab's] Great Work In Order Not to Forget his Lord [Tsong-kha-pa’s] Ordering
of the Path of Valid Cognition,
rgyal tsab rjes rjeʼi drung du gsan paʼi tsad maʼi brjed byang chen mo / tshad ma brjed byang
chen mo / rjeʼi tshad maʼi lam sgrig
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (tsong kha pa). TBRC W635.14 (Pdf of New Delhi,
India: Mongolian Lama guru Deva, 1978-1979).
Song of Experience of the Stages of the Path
byang chub lam gyi rim paʼi nyams len gyi rnam bzhag mdor bsdus te brjed byang du byas pa /
lam rim nyams mgur
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ʼbum (tsong kha pa). TBRC W635.2:314-319. (PDF of
New Delhi, India: Mongolian Lama Guru Deva, 1978-1979).
Also lam rim nyams mgur, in Chos spyod zhal 'don nyer mkho phyogs bsdebs, Gelugpa Student's
Welfare Committee, Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies, Sarnath, 1979.
Three Principal Aspects of the Path
lam gtso rnam gsum
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bka’ ’bum (thor bu: tsong kha pa), volume kha. TBRC
W486.1:356-369 (PDF of Zi Ling: mtsho sngon mi rigs dpe skrun khang, 1987).
Wal-mang Kön-chog-gyal-tshan (dbal mang dkon mchog rgyal mtshan, 1764-1853)
Notes on (Kön-chog-jig-may-wang-po’s) Lectures / Notes on (Kön-chog-jig-may-wang-po’s) Lec-
tures on (Tsong-kha-pa’s) “The Essence of Eloquence”: Stream of the Speech of the Omniscient,
Offering for Purif ication
legs bshad snying po’i gsung bshad zin bris su bkod pa kun mkhyen gsung gi chu rgyun dag
byed mchod yon
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In gsung ’bum (dkon mchog rgyal mtshan) TBRC
W1KG1132.2:379-468 (PDF of dga’ ldan chos ’khor gling, no publication data).
Collected Works of Dbal-maṅ Dkon-mchog-rgyal-mtshan, vol. 2, 376-464. New Delhi: Gyeltan
Gelek Namgyal, 1974.
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras”: Blossoming Flower of the
Subduer’s Teaching
mdo sde rgyan gyi ʼgrel pa thub bstan rgyas paʼi me tog
In gsung ʼbum (dkon mchog rgyal mtshan) TBRC W1KG1132.8:3-378 (PDF of dgaʼ ldan chos
ʼkhor gling), [n.d.]).
Peking 6087
Ye-shay-day (ye shes sde, fl. 8th century)
Distinctions in the Views

174 Bibliography of Works Cited
lta ba’i khyad par
Tibetan digital reprint edition: In bstan ’gyur (sde dge, 4360). TBRC W23703.206:428-
457 (Delhi, India: Delhi Karmapae chodhey, Gyalwae sungrab partun khang, 1982-1985).
4. Other Works
Amano, Kōei. A study on the Abhisamaya-alaṃ kā ra-kā rikā -ś ā stra-vṛtti. Rev. ed. Yanai City, Japan:
Rokoku Bunko, 2008.
Bastian, Edward Winslow. Mahāyāna Buddhist Religious Practice and the Perfection of Wisdom:
According to the Abhisamayālaṃkāra and the Pañcavimśatisāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā: (The
Interpretation of the First Two Topics by Haribhadra, Rgyal-Tshab Dar-Ma-Rin-Chen, and
Rje-Btsun Chos-Kyi Rgyal-Mtshan. Ann Arbor, MI: University Microfilms International, 1980.
Brunnhölzl, Karl. Gone Beyond: The Prajñ ā pā ramitā̄ Sū tras, The Ornament of Clear Realization,
and its Commentaries in the Tibetan Kagyü Tradition. The Tsadra Foundation series. 2 vols.
Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 2011-2012.
―――. Groundless Paths: The Prajñāpāramitā Sūtras, The Ornament of Clear Realization, and Its
Commentaries in the Tibetan Nyingma Tradition. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 2012.
―――. Straight from the Heart.Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 2007.
―――. The Gilgit manuscript of the As ̣tạ ̄ daś asā hasrikā prajñ ā pā ramitā: Chapters 55 to 70 corre-
sponding to the 5th Abhisamaya. Roma, Italy: Istituto Italiano per il Medio ed Estremo Oriente,
1962.
―――. The Large Sūtra on Perfect Wisdom, with the Divisions of the Abhisamayālaṅkāra. Berkeley,
CA: University of California Press, 1975.
―――. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines & Its Verse Summary. Bolinas, Calif.:
Four Seasons Foundation, 1973.
Dhargey, Geshe Ngawang. “A Short Biography” in Life and Teachings of Tsong Khapa, ed. Robert
A. F. Thurman. Dharmsala: Library of Tibetan Works and Archives, 1982. 4-39.
Dorje, Gyurme, and Matthew Kapstein. The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamen-
tals and History. Vol. 2. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1991.
Dudjom Rinpoche. The Nyingma School of Tibetan Buddhism: Its Fundamentals and History. Vol.
1. Trans. and ed. Gyurme Dorje and Matthew Kapstein. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1991.
Edgerton, Franklin. Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit Grammar and Dictionary. New Haven: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1953; reprint, Delhi: Motilal, 1972.
Goodman, Steven D. “Mi-pham rgya-mtsho: An Account of His Life, the Printing of His Works, and
the Structure of His Treatise Entitled mKhas-pa’i tshul la ’jug-pa’i sgo.” In Ronald M. Da-
vidson (ed.), Wind Horse: Proceedings of the North American Tibetological Society, 58-78.
Berkeley: Asian Humanities Press, 1981.
Cleary, Thomas. Buddhist Yoga: A Comprehensive Course. Boston: Shambhala, 1995.
Conze, E. The Perfection of Wisdom in Eight Thousand Lines & Its Verse Summary. Bolinas, Calif.:
Four Seasons Foundation, 1973.
Cutler, Joshua W. C. and Guy Newland. The Great Treatise on the Stages of the Path to Enlighten-
ment. vols. 1-3. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 2000-2003.
.H. the Dalai Lama, Tenzin Gyatso. Kindness, Clarity, and Insight. Translated and edited by Jeffrey
Hopkins; coedited by Elizabeth Napper. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1984.
———. The Buddhism of Tibet and the Key to the Middle Way. Translated by Jeffrey Hopkins. Lon-
don: George Allen and Unwin, 1975. Reprinted in a combined volume, The Buddhism of Tibet.
London: George Allen and Unwin, 1983; reprint, Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 1987.
―――. The Dalai Lama at Harvard. Trans. and ed. by Jeffrey Hopkins. Ithaca: Snow Lion Publica-
tions, 1989.
———. The Meaning of Life: Buddhist Perspectives on Cause and Effect, trans. and ed. Jeffrey
Hopkins. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 2000.
———. Tantra in Tibet. London: George Allen and Unwin, 1977; reprint, with minor corrections,

Bibliography of Works Cited 175
Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1987.
Hopkins, Jeffrey. “A Tibetan Delineation of Different Views of Emptiness in the Indian Middle Way
School: Dzong-ka-ba’s Two Interpretations of the Locus Classicus in Chandrakīrti’s Clear
Words Showing Bhāvaviveka’s Assertion of Commonly Appearing Subjects and Inherent Ex-
istence.” Tibet Journal 14, no. 1 (1989): 10-43.
―――. Absorption In No External World: 170 Issues in Mind-Only Buddhism. Dynamic Responses
to Dzong-ka-ba’s The Essence of Eloquence, Volume 3. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications,
2005.
―――. Cultivating Compassion. New York: Broadway Books, 2001.
―――. Emptiness in the Middle Way School of Buddhism: Mutual Reinforcement of Understanding
Dependent-Arising and Emptiness, Dynamic Responses to Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Elo-
quence, Volume 4. UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
―――. Emptiness in the Mind-Only School of Buddhism. Dynamic Responses to Dzong-ka-ba’s The
Essence of Eloquence, Volume 1. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999.
―――. Emptiness Yoga. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1987.
―――. “Extracts from (Si-tu Paṇ-chen Chö-kyi-jung-nay’s) ‘Explanation of (Tön-mi Sambhoṭa’s)
The Thirty.’”
―――. Maps of the Profound: Jam-yang-shay-ba’s Great Exposition of Buddhist and Non-Buddhist
Views on the Nature of Reality. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2003.
―――. Meditation on Emptiness. London: Wisdom Publications, 1983; rev. ed., Boston, Ma.: Wis-
dom Publications, 1996.
―――. Mi-pam-gya-tsho’s Primordial Enlightenment: The Nying-ma View of Luminosity and Emp-
tiness, Analysis of Fundamental Mind, with oral commentary by Khetsun Sangpo. UMA Insti-
tute for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
―――. Mountain Doctrine: Tibet’s Fundamental Treatise on Other-Emptiness and the Buddha Ma-
trix. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2006.
―――. Nāgārjuna’s Precious Garland: Buddhist Advice for Living and Liberation. Ithaca, NY:
Snow Lion Publications, 2007.
―――. Reflections on Reality: The Three Natures and Non-Natures in the Mind-Only School. Dy-
namic Responses to Dzong-ka-ba’s The Essence of Eloquence, Volume 2. Berkeley: University
of California Press, 2002.
Hopkins, Jeffrey, and Napper, Elizabeth. “Grammar Summaries for Tibetan.” UMA Institute for Ti-
betan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Hopkins, Jeffrey, and Yi, Jongbok. The Hidden Teaching of the Perfection of Wisdom Sutras: Jam-
yang-shay-pa’s Seventy Topics and Kön-chog-jig-may-wang-po’s 173 Aspects. UMA Institute
for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Hopkins, Jeffrey, and Yi, Jongbok. Ngag-wang-pal-dan's Explanation of the Treatise "Ornament for
the Clear Realizations" From the Approach of the Meaning of the Words: the Sacred Word of
Maitreyanātha. UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Kapstein, Matthew. “Mi-pham’s Theory of Interpretation.” In Donald S. Lopez, Jr. (ed.), Buddhist
Hermeneutics, pp. 149-174. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1988.
Klein, Anne C. Knowing, Naming, and Negation. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion, 1988.
Klein, Anne C. Path to the Middle: Madhyamaka Philosophy in Tibet: The Oral Scholarship of Ken-
sur Yeshay Tupden. Albany: SUNY Press, 1994.
Lama Chimpa and Chattopadhyaya, Alaka. Tāranātha’s History of Buddhism in India (Simla, India:
1970; reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1990).
Lati Rinbochay, Denma Lochö Rinbochay, Leah Zahler, and Jeffrey Hopkins. Meditative States in
Tibetan Buddhism. London: Wisdom, 1983; rev. ed., Boston: Wisdom, 1997.
Lati Rinbochay and Elizabeth Napper. Mind in Tibetan Buddhism. London: Rider, 1980; Ithaca,
N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1980.
La Vallée Poussin, Louis de. Vijñaptimātratāsiddhi: La Siddhi de Hiuan-Tsang. Paris: P. Geuthner,
1928-1929.
Lekden, Kensur. Meditations of a Tibetan Tantric Abbot. Translated and edited by Jeffrey Hopkins.

176 Bibliography of Works Cited
Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2001.
Levinson, Jules. What Does Chandrakirti Add to Nagarjuna’s Treatise? Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Great
Exposition of the Middle. UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Lodrö, Gedün. Calm Abiding and Special Insight. Edited and translated by Jeffrey Hopkins. Ithaca,
N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1998.
Magee, William. Principles for Practice: Jam-yang-shay-pa and the Four Reliances. UMA Institute
for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Magee, William. Questioning Contradiction: Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Great Exposition of the Interpret-
able and the Definitive, 2. UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Maher, Derek F. “Knowledge and Authority in Tibetan Middle Way Schools of Buddhism: A Study
of the Gelukba (dge lugs pa) Epistemology of Jamyang Shayba ('jam dbyangs bzhad pa) In Its
Historical Context.” Ph.D. diss., University of Virginia, 2003.
McCormick, Ryuei Michael. Incorrigible Evildoers: The Story of Devadatta and Prince Ajātashatru.
http://nichirenscoffeehouse.net/Ryuei/Devadatta_Story.html.
Mitra, Rajendra Lala. Aṣṭasāhasrikā Prajñāpāramitā, Bibliotheca Indica, no. 110, Calcutta: Baptist
Mission Press, 1888.
Nakamura, H. Indian Buddhism, a survey with bibliographical notes. Osaka: Kufs Publications,
1980.
Nagao, Gadjin M. “What Remains in Śūnyatā? A Yogācāra Interpretation of Emptiness.” In
Mahāyāna Buddhist Meditation, Theory and Practice, edited by Minoru Kiyota, 66-82. Hono-
lulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1978; reprinted in Mādhyamika and Yogācāra: A Study of
Mahāyāna Philosophies, translated by Leslie S. Kawamura, 51-60. Albany, N.Y.: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 1991.
Napper, Elizabeth. Dependent-Arising and Emptiness. London: Wisdom Publications, 1989.
Napper, Elizabeth. Traversing the Spiritual Path: Kon-chog-jig-may-wang-po’s Presentation of the
Grounds and Path. UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Newland, Guy. The Two Truths. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1992.
Newland, Guy, ed. Changing Minds. Contributions to the Study of Buddhism and Tibet in Honor of
Jeffrey Hopkins. (Ithaca: Snow Lion Publications, 2001).
Obermiller, E. History of Buddhism (Chos-ḥbyung) by Bu-ston. Heidelberg: Heft, 1932; reprint, To-
kyo: Suzuki Research Foundation, n.d.
Pettit, John. Mi-pham’s Beacon of Certainty. Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1999.
Perdue, Daniel E. Debate in Tibetan Buddhism. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1992.
Preston, Craig. Meaning of “The Manifest,” Vessels for the Teaching of Emptiness, Nāgārjuna’s
Lives, and Ten Samenesses: Jam-yang-shay-pa's Great Exposition of the Middle: Chapter Six,
Introduction. UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Poussin, Louis de la Vallée, trans. Madhyamakāvatāra. Muséon 8 (1907), 249-317; 11 (1910), 271-
358; and 12 (1911), 235-328.
Poussin, Louis de la Vallée. Madhyamakāvatāra par Candrakīrti. Bibliotheca Buddhica IX. Osna-
brück: Biblio Verlag, 1970.
Powers, C. John The Concept of the Ultimate (don dam pa, paramārtha) in the Saṃdhinirmocana-
sūtra: Analysis, Translation and Notes. Ann Arbor, Mich.: University Microfilms, 1991.
Radich, Michael. How Ajātashatru Was Reformed: The Domestication of “Ajase” and Stories in
Buddhis History. Studea Philologica Buddhica Monograph Series XXVII. Tokyo: The Interna-
tional Institute for Buddhist Studies Studies, 2011.
Rogers, Katherine Manchester. Tibetan Logic. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2009.
Ruegg, David Seyfort. “The Jo Naṅ Pas: A School of Buddhist Ontologists according to the Grub
mtha’ sel gyi me loṅ.” Journal of the American Oriental Society 83, no. 1 (1963):73-91.
———. The Literature of the Madhyamaka School of Philosophy in India. Wiesbaden, Germany:
Otto Harrassowitz, 1981.
Smith, E. Gene. University of Washington Tibetan Catalogue. 2 vols. Seattle: University of Wash-
ington Press, 1969.
Sopa, Geshe Lhundup, and Jeffrey Hopkins. Cutting through Appearances: The Practice and Theory

Bibliography of Works Cited 177
of Tibetan Buddhism. Ithaca, NY: Snow Lion Publications, 1989.
Sparham, Gareth. Maitreyanā tha, Ā ryavimuktisena, and Haribhadra. Abhisamayā laṃ kā ra with Vṛtti
and Ālokā. 4 vols. Fremont, CA: Jain Publishing Company., 2006-2011.
―――. Detailed Explanation of the Ornament and Brief Called Golden Garland of Eloquence by
Tsong kha pa, 4 vols. Fremont, CA: Jain Publishing Company, 2008-2010.
Staal, J.F. “Negation and the Law of Contradiction in Indian Thought”. London: Bulletin of the
School of Oriental and African Studies, Vol. XXV: Part 1, 1962.
Stcherbatsky, Theodore and Eugène Obermiller, eds. Abhisamayā laṅ kā ra-Prajñ ā pā ramitā -Upadeś a-
śā stra: The Work of Bodhisattva Maitreya. Bibliotheca Buddhica 23. Osnabrück, Germany:
Biblio Verlag, 1970. Reprint ed. Delhi, India: Sri Satguru Publications, 1992.
Stearns, Cyrus R. The Buddha from Dol po: A Study of the Life and Thought of the Tibetan Master
Dolpopa Sherab Gyaltsen. Albany, N.Y.: State University of New York Press, 1999.
Tillemans, Tom J.F. “Tsong kha pa et al. on the Bhāvaviveka-Candrakīrti Debate” in Tibetan Stud-
ies: Proceedings of the 5th Seminar of the International Association for Tibetan Studies. Mono-
graph Series of Naritasan Institute for Buddhist Studies: Occasional Papers 2. Narita: Narita-
san Shinshō-ji, 1992.
Tsong-kha-pa, Kensur Lekden, and Jeffrey Hopkins. Compassion in Tibetan Buddhism. London:
Rider, 1980; reprint, Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 1980. Available free online at
http://uma-tibet.org/edu/gomang/dbu_ma/middle.php.
Tucci ed., “Minor Sanskrit Texts on the Prajñāpāramitā: The Prajñāpāramitāpiṇḍārtham of
Dignāga.” Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society, 1947.
Van der Kuijp, Leonard W. J. “Apropos of a Recent Contribution to the History of Central Way Phi-
losophy in Tibet: Tsong Khapa’s Speech of Gold . ” Berliner Indologische Studien 1 (1985):
47-74.
Wayman, Alex, and Hideko Wayman. The Lion’s Roar of Queen Śrīmālā. New York: Columbia
University Press, 1974.
Willis, Janice D. On Knowing Reality: The Tattvārtha Chapter of Asaṅga’s Bodhisattvabhūmi. New
York: Columbia University Press, 1979; reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1982.
Wilson, Joe B. The Meaning of Mind in the Mahāyāna Buddhist Philosophy of Mind-Only (Cit-
tamātra): A Study of a Presentation by the Tibetan Scholar Gung-tang Jam-pay-yang (gung-
thang-’jam-pa’i-dbyangs) of Asaṅga’s Theory of Mind-Basis-of-All (ālayavijñāna) and Related
Topics in Buddhist Theories of Personal Continuity, Epistemology, and Hermeneutics. Ann Ar-
bor, Mich.: University Microfilms, 1984.
Wylie, Turrell. “A Standard System of Tibetan Transcription.” Harvard Journal of Asiatic Studies
22 (1959): 261-267.
Yi, Jongbok. The Opposite of Emptiness in the Middle Way Autonomy School: Jam-yang-shay-pa’s
Great Exposition of the Middle. UMA Institute for Tibetan Studies. http://uma-tibet.org.
Zahler, Leah. Study and Practice of Meditation: Tibetan Interpretations of the Concentrations and
Formless Absorptions. Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion Publications, 2009.

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s (gung thang blo gros rgya mtsho, 1851-1928/1930) Clar-
ification of the Meaning of the Thought of the Two—the “Decisive Analysis on the Perfec-
tion of Wisdom: Jeweled Lamp” by the Supreme Lama Jam-yang[-shay-pa] and the “An-
notative Commentary” by the Foremost Named Dipaṃ (Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-
drön-me), 6a.4, points out that according to Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis earlier
Tibetans posited both these texts and the authors as openers of the chariot-ways. Gung-
thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s (gung thang dkon mchog bstan pa’i sgron me, 1762-
1823) work is his Beginnings of an Annotative Commentary on (Jam-yang-shay-pa’s) “De-
cisive Analysis on the First Chapter of the ‘Perfection of Wisdom’” (phar phyin skabs dang
po'i mtha' dpyod kyi mchan 'grel rtsom 'phro).
Thus, here Jam-yang-shay-pa deliberately words these four as treatises; Gung-thang
Lo-drö-gya-tsho (6a.3) explains:
Although Kön-chog-jig-may-wang-po’s Beginnings of a Composition on De-
pendent-arising (Delhi: Ngawang Gelek Demo, vol. 7, 353/3a.4ff.) says that ear-
lier Tibetans did not posit persons as openers of the chariot-ways, and some oth-
ers say that only persons are posited, that in Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Anal-
ysis the two—treatises and persons—are posited is the thought of Tsong-kha-
pa’s Golden Garland:
Though there are also many treatises that comment on the thought of these
[Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras], the chief[…]
and:
Moreover, the great being Nāgārjuna…
See Sparham, Golden Garland of Eloquence, vol. 1, 5.
Brackets are from Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-
pa’s “Decisive Analysis” and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations”
(’jam dbyangs bla ma mchog gi phar phyin mtha’ dpyod rin chen sgron me dang rje di
paṃ mtshan can gyi mchan ’grel gnyis kyi dgongs don gsal bar byed pa skal bzang ’jug
ngogs), TBRC W1KG21227, 6a.5: rang gzhan gyi sde pa dngos smra ba rnams kyi bsgrub
byar byas pa’i bden dngos.
kha che mche ba’i sde. Lama Chimpa and Alaka Chattopadhyaya, Tāranātha’s History
of Buddhism in India (Simla, India: 1970; reprint, Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1990), gives
as alternate names Daṃṣṭrāsena, Diṣṭasena, Daṃṣṭasena, Daṃṣṭrāsena, Daṃṣṭasyana,
and so forth. Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Precious Lamp (290.1) cites the ’phang thang
gi dkar chag as identifying Damṣṭasena as the author. In his La Théorie du Tathāga-
thagarbha et du Gotra (61 and 325) D. S. Ruegg identifies the author as Daṃṣṭrāsena.
Here, Jam-yang-shay-pa’s usage of the transliterated Daṃṣhṭasena is being followed; see
below.
Brackets are from Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-
pa’s “Decisive Analysis” and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations,”
TBRC W1KG21227, 6a.5: rang gzhan gyi sde pa dngos smra ba rnams kyi bsgrub byar
byas pa’i bden dngos.
Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho (Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s “Decisive Analysis”
and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations,” TBRC W1KG21227, 6a.5)

180 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
explains (1) that the Sixty Stanzas of Reasoning proves that from accustoming to the pris-
tine wisdom realizing the absence of true existence nirvāṇa is attained and (2) that the
Precious Garland proves that from it omniscience is attained, due to which these two texts
are said to refute the truly established actualities propounded by our own Buddhist sects in
particular.
Identification by Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho (Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s
“Decisive Analysis” and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations,” TBRC
W1KG21227, 6b.5).
The late Ge-dun-lo-drö speculated that the author of this commentary may have been
named Akutobhayā, and thus his text is called the Akutobhayā Commentary much as Bud-
dhapālita’s commentary is called the Buddhapālita Commentary.
Brackets from Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s “De-
cisive Analysis” and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations,”
W1KG21227, 6b.5.
Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s “Decisive Analysis”
and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations” (TBRC W1KG21227, 9a.3)
identifies a passage in Bu-tön Rin-chen-drub’s (bu ston rin chen grub, 1290-1364) Cluster
of Scriptures / Extensive Explanation of (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realization,
Treatise of Quintessential Instructions on the Perfection of Wisdom” as Well as Its Com-
mentary (lung gi snye ma/ shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa’i man ngag gi bstan bcos mngon
par rtogs pa’i rgyan zhes bya ba’i 'grel pa’i rgya cher bshad pa) where he cites
“Daṃṣhṭasena’s Commentary on the One Hundred Thousand” and a passage in his History
of the Religion (chos ’byung) where he does the same, as well as a reference to his taking
the commentary on all three Mothers to be by Daṃṣhṭasena and then calls for analysis as
to which of two commentaries Bu-tön posits as the means of opening the chariot-way.
Earlier, this reason was presented as:
in terms of the actual fact, in accordance with the Teachings of Akṣhayamati
Sūtra, the commentaries abide in two [types]—a mode of commentary on the
explicit teaching, emptiness, and a mode of commentary on the hidden meaning,
the clear realizations.
The achievement of high status (elevated states within cyclic existence) and definite
goodness (liberation from cyclic existence and the great liberation of Buddhahood).
The four, as laid out just below, are subject matter (brjod bya), purpose (dgos pa), essen-
tial purpose (nying dgos), and relationship (’brel ba).
About how this clause is read, Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Clarification (TBRC
W1KG21227-L1KG21259, 14b.6) says:
Therefore, if the statement in Jam-yang-shay-pa’s textbook “It follows that this
is not logically feasible rather than the earlier” (de snga ma las kyang mi ’thad
par thal) is taken as “It follows that this presentation of your own system and
execution of a refutation by you [Dharmamitra] are not logically feasible rather
than the earlier assertion by Prajñākaramati that you refuted,” it fits together with
the thought of Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s Annotations and Jam-
yang-shay-pa’s Decisive Analysis because the passage from Tsong-kha-pa’s
Golden Garland also is [saying], “Rather than Prajñākaramati, the two—the ref-
utation and presentation by you—are not logically feasible.”
The last reason clause in the brackets are from Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Clarifica-
tion, TBRC W1KG21227-L1KG21259, 14b.4.
Above (61), where Jam-yang-shay-pa stated:

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 181
The subject, the master Haribhadra, makes praise and homage to all three per-
fections of wisdom—text, path, and result—because while expressing the good
qualities of the three perfections of wisdom he bows the three doors [of his body,
speech, and mind], because Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary says:
Respectful homage to the perfection of wisdom.
and because with “perfection of wisdom” he praises by way expressing good
qualities, and bowing is homage.
Or “transcendent wisdom.”
Haribhadra’s Clear Meaning Commentary says:
Respectful homage to the perfection of wisdom
In order to open up
The Versified Ornament of those
As an ornament for all.
This passage is the first of five contiguous extracts from Haribhadra’s Illumination of the
“Ornament,” Wogihara edition, 22-23; rgyan snang, cha,18a.3-18b.1; Sparham, Abhisam-
ayālaṃkāra with Vṛtti and Ālokā, vol. 1, 198-199. Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho (Clarifi-
cation of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s “Decisive Analysis” and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-
drön-me’s “Annotations,” TBRC W1KG21227, 15b.5, TBRC W2CZ7948-1KG10272,
16a.2) lists the six minds (sems drug) evident in Haribhadra’s exposition and describes
them:
From among the six minds described in Haribhadra’s Great Commentary:
1. The root mind (rtsa ba’i sems) is an awareness apprehending by way of mere
term-generalities [verbal images], “My treatise in which I am engaged is the
Eight Thousand [Perfection of Wisdom Sūtra].” This [root mind] is posited rang-
ing from immediately upon having engaged in the Eight Thousand by way of
hearing and so forth.
2. The analytic mind (rjes su dpyod pa’i sems), according to Pal-mang Rin-po-che
(dpal mang dkon mchog rgyal mtshan rin po che, also called Wal-mang Kön-
chog-gyal-tshan, dbal mang dkon mchog rgyal mtshan, 1764-1853) in his Com-
mentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Great Vehicle Sūtras”: Blossoming
Flower of the Subduer’s Teaching (mdo sde’i rgyan gyi ’grel pa thub bstan rgyas
pa’i me tog) involves the two, hearing and thinking observing the chapters, count
of stanzas, and so forth of the Eight Thousand; he associates rjes su dpyod pa’i
tshig dang in Jam-yang-shay-pa’s textbook with the mode of performing think-
ing (bsam pa byed tshul) [in the next mind, the third mind].*
3. The intensely analytic mind (rnam par dpyod pa’i sems) is twofold, analyzing
meanings (don la dpyod pa) and analyzing words (tshig la dpyod pa).
a) Analyzing meanings is fourfold:
(i) Enumeration (bgrang ba) is to apprehend the mere count of the eight
categories and so forth.
(ii) Comprehension (gzhal ba) is to apprehend the individual natures of
those [eight categories and so forth].
(iii) Realization (rtogs pa) is an awareness clearing away superimposition
and deprecation with regard to the characters, modes of practice, and
so forth of those [eight categories and so forth]. When this is generated,
has one engaged in the meaning of the Eight Thousand through states

182 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
arisen from thinking (bsam byung)? [When it is taken as being so,] it
fits together with the statement in Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-
drön-me’s Annotations, “In order to gain states arisen from thinking
with regard to the Ornament…one must know the modes of practice.”
(iv) Definite realization (nges par rtogs pa) is an awareness again and
again recalling the modes of practice and so forth of those [eight cate-
gories and so forth].
b) Analyzing words/ connotative units (tshig la dpyod pa) [or analyzing letters
(yi ge la dpyod pa)] is twofold:
(i) Apprehending as not having meaning (don med par ’dzin pa) is to ap-
prehend merely individual words/ connotative units or merely each
chapter as not having the meaning of fully teaching the meaning of the
Mother [perfection of wisdom]
(ii) Apprehending as having meaning (don dang bcas par ’dzin pa) is to
apprehend the collection, that is, the thirty-two chapters, as having the
meaning of fully, explicitly teaching the meaning of the Mother [per-
fection of wisdom]. Since this analyzes the way the words teach ob-
jects of expression, it is different from the analytic mind [the second
of the six minds].
4. The mind of definite apprehension (nges par ’dzin pa’i sems) is an awareness
abiding one-pointedly individually analyzing the meanings expressed in those
[eight categories and so forth].
5. The mind of summarization (sdom pa’i sems) is a meditative awareness upon
having brought those altogether, “The modes of practicing the meanings of this
text in which I am engaged are such-and-such.”
6. The mind of hope together with aspiration (’dun pa dang lhan cig pa re ba ba’i
sems) is a mind of dedicating (bsngo ba’i sems) the roots of virtue of the first
five minds to complete enlightenment.
The final three [minds] are associated with the ways of performing meditation.
* Jam-yang-shay-pa, however, appears to elide the second and third mind, resulting in an
awkward sentence, which could be a scribal error.
The entire passage in Haribhadra’s Great Commentary is:
In a clean area Bodhisattvas in a cross-legged posture, having previously ob-
served the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, from the viewpoint of the bare words
(ming) thoroughly observe with the root mind (rtsa ba’i sems) the modes of the
perfection of wisdom that teach all phenomena as selfless, and with an analytic
mind (rjes su dpyod pa’i sems) investigate the divisions of its connotative units
(tshig) by way of its chapters and so forth. Then they enumerate with numbers
(bgrang bas) the divisions of states of the eight clear realizations, ascertain with
comprehension (gzhal bas) each clear realization’s nature, [ascertain] with real-
ization (rtog pas/ rtogs pas) the nonexistence of superimposition and depreca-
tion, and make a logical decision with definite realization (nges par rtog pas/
nges par rtogs pas) through direct and inferential valid cognition;] they analyze
the topics of the perfection of wisdom with an intensely analytic mind (rnam par
dpyod pa’i sems) by way of four such aspects, and they analyze by way of two
aspects that the connotative units individually do not have the [full] meaning and
collectively have the [full] meaning, respectively. Then, with a mind of definite

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 183
apprehension (nges par ’dzin pa’i sems kyis) they apprehend the signs in accord-
ance with how they have been intensely analyzed; with a mind of summarization
(sdom pa’i sems) the topics—as they have been analyzed—are fit together with
the root mind that focuses on the bare words; and with a mind of hope together
with aspiration (’dun pa dang lhan cig pa’i re ba ba’i sems) they meditate on
these topics in which they are intensively training. Thus, since through the stages
of first generating consciousnesses having the nature of hearing, thinking, and
meditation they realize the pristine wisdom knowing all aspects, it has gone be-
yond, that is, has gone to the far limit, and hence is a “perfection of wisdom.”
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔས་ས་ཕྱོགས་གཙང་མར་སྐྱིལ་མོ་ཀྲུང་བཅས་ཏེ། སངས་རྒྱས་དང་
བྱང་ཆུབ་སེམས་དཔའ་ལ་དམིགས་པ་སྔོན་དུ་འགྲོ་བས། ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་
པའི་ཚུལ་ཆོས་ཐམས་ཅད་བདག་མེད་པར་སྟོན་པར་བྱེད་པ་ལ་
1. རྩ་བའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་མིང་གི་སྒོ་ནས་ཡང་དག་པར་དམིགས་ལ།
2. རྗེས་སུ་དཔྱད་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་དེ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཚིག་གི་རབ་ཏུ་དབྱེ་བ་ལེའུ་ལ་སོགས་
པའི་བྱེ་བྲག་གིས་བརྟག་པར་བྱའོ།
3. [རྣམ་པར་དཔྱོད་པའི་སེམས་]
a) [དོན་ལ་]
(i) དེ་ནས་བགྲང་བས་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ་བརྒྱད་ཀྱི་གནས་སྐབས་ཀྱི་དབྱེ་བས་
གྲངས་གཟུང་བའི་ཕྱིར་དང་།
(ii) གཞལ་བས་མངོན་པར་རྟོགས་པ་སོ་སོའི་རང་བཞིན་ངེས་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་།
(iii) རྟོག་པས་སྒྲོ་འདོགས་པ་དང་སྐུར་པ་འདེབས་པ་མེད་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་།
(iv) ངེས་པར་རྟོག་པས་མངོན་སུམ་དང་རྗེས་སུ་དཔག་པའི་ཚད་མས་འཐད་པར་
བྱས་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། དེ་ལྟར་རྣམ་པ་བཞིས་ཤེས་རབ་ཀྱི་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའི་དོན་ལ་
དང་།
b) [ཡི་གེ་ལ་]
སོ་སོ་བ་དང་། བསྡུས་པ་གོ་རིམས་བཞིན་དུ་
(i) དོན་མེད་པ་དང་
(ii) དོན་དང་བཅས་པ་ཡིན་ནོ་ཞེས་བྱ་བས་ཡི་གེ་ལ་སྟེ།
རྣམ་པ་འདི་དག་གིས་རྣམ་པར་དཔྱོད་པའི་སེམས་ཀྱིས་དཔྱད་པར་བྱའོ༎

184 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
4. དེའི་འོག་ཏུ་ཇི་ལྟར་རྣམ་པར་དཔྱད་པའི་མཚན་མ་དེ་ངེས་པར་འཛིན་པའི་སེམས་
ཀྱིས་བཟུང་ལ།
5. ཇི་ལྟར་བརྟགས་པའི་དོན་ཉིད་མིང་ལ་དམིགས་པར་བྱེད་པའི་རྩ་བའི་སེམས་ཉིད་
དུ་སྡོམ་པའི་སེམས་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་བཅུག་ལ།
6. དོན་གང་ལ་རབ་ཏུ་སྦྱོར་བར་འགྱུར་བ་དེ་འདུན་པ་དང་ལྷན་ཅིག་པའི་རེ་བའི་
སེམས་ཀྱིས་བསྒོམ་པར་བྱའོ༎ དེ་ལྟར་ན་དང་པོ་ཐོས་པ་དང་བསམ་པ་དང་བསྒོམ་པའི་
རང་བཞིན་ཅན་གྱི་ཤེས་པ་སྐྱེ་བའི་རིམ་གྱིས། རྣམ་པ་ཐམས་ཅད་མཁྱེན་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་
རྟོགས་པའི་ཕྱིར། ཕ་རོལ་ཏེ་རབ་ཀྱི་མཐར་འགྲོ་བ་ཡིན་པས་ན་ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པའོ། །
Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations, IV.33; this is the first line of two stanzas
on the divisions of concordances with a portion of liberation, also called the path of accu-
mulation:
{IV.33}
Faith observing Buddhas and so forth,
Effort having giving and so forth as its objects of activity,
Mindfulness of the excellent attitude,
Nonconceptual meditative stabilization,
{IV.34}
Wisdom knowing phenomena
In all aspects—comprising five aspects.
It is asserted that complete enlightenment
Is realized easily by the sharp but with difficulty by the dull.
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations”: Clearing Away the
Darkness for Those Wanting Liberation (mngon rtogs rgyan gyi 'grel chung don gsal ba'i
mchan 'grel kun bzang zhing gi nyi ma thar 'dod mun sel), TBRC W00EGS1017126 (PDF
of Lhasa (?): dge ldan legs bshad gsung rab 'grem spel khang, 2006), vol. 1, 5.5-8.10, gives
a detailed commentary on the stanza, which in selective paraphrase is:
From complete—surpassing—affection due to affection for migrators out of
compassion, the causal excellent attitude, performing practice for twelve
years and acting to give his flesh to a female dog,
Asaṅga, a Superior due to having attaining the third [Bodhisattva] ground,
refuge from suffering for others—the excellent undertaking—
Having listened to the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras, the Five Doctrines of
Maitreya, and so forth from Ajita [Maitreya]—undaunted by worldly gods—
protector of sentient beings, in the Joyous Pure Land for fifty human years,
Made an exposition, Compendium of Ascertainments* of the great treatises,
commenting on the meaning expressed in the Ornament for the Clear Reali-
zations and the Mother Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras without connecting the
explanation to them.

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 185
* nirṇayasaṃgraha / viniścayasaṃgrahaṇī, rnam par gtan la dbab pa bsdu ba / rnam nges;
Peking 5539, vols. 110-111.
Jam-yang-shay-pa (Hopkins, Maps of the Profound, 302) tells the story of Asaṅga’s
meditation for twelve years:
The great chariot Asaṅga, despite having practiced at achieving a meeting with
Maitreya for three years, did not gain even a sign, due to which he was discour-
aged, but when leaving [his cave], he saw an old man rubbing a piece of iron
with wool, who said he was making a needle and praised his effort; so, Asaṅga
turned back. Again, having practiced for three years, he was leaving when he
saw that drops of water had worn down rock, whereupon he generated an attrib-
ute of effort. Again, having practiced for three years, he was discouraged and
left, but saw that the feathers of a birth had worn down rock [coming into and
leaving his cave], whereupon he returned for another three years. Though he
practiced for twelve years, a sign had not arisen, and so, discouraged, he went
outside, where he saw a female dog whose lower abdomen had been chewed up
by worms. Generating compassion, he cut flesh from his thigh [so he could re-
move the worms and feed them on his own flesh], whereupon he saw the dog as
the protector Maitreya, and [being taken] to the Joyous Pure Land, he heard the
Great Vehicle Manifest Knowledge Mother Sūtra, the Five Doctrines of Mait-
reya, and so forth. [Returning to this world] he opened the Mind-Only way in
accordance with the Sūtra Unraveling the Thought.
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations, vol. 1, 8.10-8.17,
Friend due to fulfilling the desired aims of migrating beings through teaching
the causes of their welfare, high status and definite goodness, Vasubandhu—
Principally evincing his own inclination adhering to true establishment in his
textual commentary on the Twenty-five Thousand Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtra—
Provided commentary in the Cognition System [Mind-Only School] in ac-
cordance with the earlier commentary by Asaṅga
Thoroughly depending on objects of knowledge being of an inner nature.
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations, vol. 1, 8.17-8.28,
Included among Superiors (ārya) due to having generated supramundane
pristine wisdom,
The one called Vimuktisena (rnam par grol ba’i sde) because of being re-
leased (grol bas) from the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing
also,
Having seen that the commentaries done by the earlier two masters were not
done exactly in accordance with the meaning of the Mother [Sūtras] since
they were done in accordance with the texts of Cognition-Only or since
Vasubandhu had not given up adherence to Cognition and Asaṅga made his
[commentary in terms of mind-only] for the sake of taming Vasubandhu,
With intelligence dwelling in the middle—the meaning of the Mother and of
[Maitreya’s] treatise free from the extremes of permanence and annihilation

186 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
and realizing such or with unbiased intelligence—properly differentiated
the topics in commentary connecting the Ornament with the Twenty-five
Thousand. Gyal-tshab’s Explanation says that thereby it is not redundant,
and also the general stages of the vast paths also are concordant between this
and the two earlier masters.
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations, vol. 1, 10.8-11.21,
After that explanatory differentiation by Āryavimuktisena, the one called
Bhadanta Vimuktisena
Whose special good quality is dwelling on the ground of faith, the path of ac-
cumulation,
Not finding the full teaching of the eight clear realizations in all the trea-
tises—the extensive, medium-length, and brief [Perfection of Wisdom
Sūtras],
Made a Commentary, explaining the Twenty-five Thousand concordant with
the mode of connection with only the Twenty-five Thousand found by him.
According to Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s “De-
cisive Analysis” and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations” (TBRC
W1KG21227, 16b.5) this means that he has generated the wisdom realizing the meaning
of the Mother (yum don rtogs pa’i shes rab skyes pa).
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations, vol. 1, 12.1-12.15,
gives detailed commentary on the stanza; his commentary according to Gyal-tshab’s Or-
nament for the Essence is, in selective paraphrase:
How amazing that I have found the treatise fully revealing the stages of clear
realization of all the middle path,
The essential meanings of all these—the Extensive, Middle-length, and Brief
Mothers—which, in the manner explained above,
Four earlier scholars illuminated in that way the words and/or the meanings
And among the two [half-]brothers and the two Vimuktisenas and so forth just
some did not find the meaning exactly as it is.
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations,” vol. 1, 12.15-13.8,
This profound path—the clear realizations and the meaning of emptiness—
extremely difficult to find
Since it was not found even by such aforementioned four scholars
Was luckily found through the force of empowering blessings by the Mait-
reya Buddha upon seeing his face [that is, encountering him] in dreams.
Therefore, it is reasonable for unbiased scholars to explore it.
Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Great Exposition of Tenets (Hopkins, Maps of the Profound, 394)
cites Asaṅga’s Summary of the Great Vehicle:
In all Perfection of Wisdom [Sūtras] non-conceptual pristine wisdom is taught
as an antidote to ten distracting conceptualizations.
and goes on to detail how the antidotes are taught (ibid, 395):

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 187
It is explained that all meanings of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras are included
in antidotes to the ten distracting conceptualizations of Bodhisattvas:
1. Antidote to conceptualization of the non-existence of effective things: Perfection
of Wisdom Sūtras say, “While existing as a Bodhisattva,” and so forth.
2. Antidote to conceptualization of effective things: Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras
say, “A Bodhisattva is not to be seen as real,” and so forth.
3. Antidote to conceptualization of superimposition: Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras
say, “The name Bodhisattva is not to be seen as real. A Bodhisattva is not to be
seen as real. The perfection of wisdom is not to be seen as real,” and so forth.
4. Antidote to conceptualization of deprecation: Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras say,
“It is not due to emptiness.”
5. Antidote to conceptualization of oneness: Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras say,
“That which is the emptiness of form is not form,” and so forth.
6. Antidote to conceptualization of difference: Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras say,
“Form is not other than emptiness. Form itself is emptiness; emptiness is form.”
7. Antidote to conceptualization of entity: Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras say, “Sub-
hūti, it is thus: This so-called ‘form’ is only a name,” and so forth.
8. Antidote to conceptualization of attribute: Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras say,
“The entity is not produced, not ceased, not afflicted, not pure,” and so forth.
9. Antidote to conceptualization of an object as like the name: Perfection of Wis-
dom Sūtras say, “Having individually assigned those phenomena with fabri-
cated names, they impute conventions in accordance with adventitious names;
they manifestly adhere to them in accordance with how conventions were im-
puted.”
10. Antidote to conceptualization of a name as like the object: Perfection of Wis-
dom Sūtras say, “Bodhisattvas do not see all those names as real. Due to not
seeing them as real, they do not adhere to them,” and so forth.
In an attempt to try to uncover why Jam-yang-shay-pa cites this line, let us supply the
context of the two stanzas in the fifth chapter of Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Real-
izations, V.15-16, in which it is embedded:
(1) Not going forth in accordance with the intents,
(2) Definitely holding paths to be non-paths,
(3) Production as well as cessation,
(4) Actualities endowed and non-endowed,
(5) Dwelling, (6) destroying the lineage,
(7) No seeking, (8) no cause,
(9) And observing opposition
Are the other conceptualizations of apprehending-subjects.
Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s Meaning of the Words, 78b.5, explains that these two stanzas are
concerned with conceptualizations conceiving of a partaker (longs spyod pa po), that is to
say, an enjoyer or user that is qualified by imputed existence but which is seen as truly
existent. These conceptualizations occur in ten contexts, namely, upon observing certain
types of persons which are described briefly in the above two stanzas and which he ampli-
fies as follows:
Conceptualizations conceiving of a partaker—qualified by imputed existence—
as truly existent upon observing:

188 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
(1) a being (skyes bu, puruṣa ) who does not go forth in accordance with the three
great intents [great mind, great abandonment, and great realization]
(2) a being who definitely holds Great Vehicle paths to be noncorrect paths
(3) a being who realizes the production and cessation of causes and effects as
made by entities only imputed conventionally
(4) a being who knows the actualities of forms and so forth as endowed (ldan pa),
that is, as not ultimately having divisions, and as non-endowed (mi ldan pa),
that is, as conventionally having divisions
(5) a being who dwells adhering to the true existence of forms and so forth
(6) a being who destroys and reverses the attitude of the lineage—that is, seeking
mere peace—of Hearers and so forth
(7) a being who when realizing emptiness, holds merely it to be sufficient and
thereupon has no desire seeking Buddhahood
(8) a being who has no cause, that is, cultivation of the perfection of wisdom
(9) a being who observes (dmigs pa)—that is, has (yod pa)—the opposing actuali-
ties interfering with enlightenment such as devilishness and so forth
are conceptualizations of apprehending-subjects other than the previous, that
is, conceptualizations apprehending imputed existence.
Often translated as “person.” See Hopkins and Yi, Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s Explanation of
(Maitreya’s) Treatise “Ornament for the Clear Realizations” from the Approach of the
Meaning of the Words: Sacred Word of Maitreyanātha, on the 46th Topic, Path-of-seeing
peak trainings, V.15-16.
The relevance of both this and previous citation from the Questions of King
Dhāraṇīṣhvara Sūtra to Jam-yang-shay-pa’s point is unclear; the relevance may be that if
Hearers need to seek teaching from others and if they are bound by misconceptions about
true existence, then the only way that they could teach about the perfection of wisdom and
its manifold divisions would be through the power of the Buddha.
Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me (Difficult Points, 16.8) takes “supreme
teaching of the Conqueror” (rgyal ba’i bstan pa mchog ) as referring to Buddha’s teaching
in general but even more so to the Great Vehicle of inseparable wisdom and method, since
the profound emptiness and the vast Bodhisattva deeds are, respectively, the transmissions
(bka’ bab) of Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga.
Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me (ibid., 15.17-16.8) takes “two modes” (tshul
gnyis) as referring to two different great ways of positing what requires interpretation and
what is definitive—as found in the two systems of the Middle Way School and the Mind-
Only School for commenting on the final thought of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras.
gsung rab, pravacana; more literally, “high sayings.” Rather than the written word,
the main field of reference of this term is the spoken word. Gung-tang (ibid., 15.1-15.17)
explains that in this context of paying homage to Nāgārjuna and Asaṅga for differentiating
the interpretable and the definitive among Buddha’s scriptures, this term refers to Buddha’s
scriptures in general and mainly refers to the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras since not only
the Proponents of the Middle but also the Proponents of Mind-Only hold the Perfection of
Wisdom Sūtras to be the chief of all sūtras. For the Proponents of Mind-Only hold that the
intended trainees of the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras are sharper than the intended trainees
of the Sūtra Unraveling the Thought, since they can understand the three natures and three
non-natures just from hearing the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras, without having to rely on
an explanation such as that given in the Sūtra Unraveling the Thought.

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 189
The Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras are the treasury that is the basis for the differentia-
tion into what requires interpretation and what is definitive, whereas the Sūtra Unraveling
the Thought and the Sūtra of the Teachings of Akṣhayamati are the keys to that treasury, in
that they show how to make the differentiation. Gung-tang therefore concludes that here
“scriptures” refers not to those two sūtras but to Buddha’s scriptures in general and mainly
the Perfection of Wisdom Sūtras.
Jam-yang-shay-pa in his Explanation of Tenets: Sun of the Land of Samantabhadra Bril-
liantly Illuminating All of Our Own and Others’ Tenets and the Meaning of the Profound
[Emptiness], Ocean of Scripture and Reasoning Fulf illing All Hopes of All Beings / Great
Exposition of Tenets (grub mtha’i rnam bshad rang gzhan grub mtha’ kun dang zab don
mchog tu gsal ba kun bzang zhing gi nyi ma lung rigs rgya mtsho skye dgu’i re ba kun
skong/ grub mtha’ chen mo) says:
Around just after the master Asaṅga opened the way of the Mind-Only School
upon having come to this world, the master Buddhapālita wrote a commentary
on Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise on the Middle, Called “Wisdom” and
thereby opened the way of the Consequence School. For:
in general there are eight commentaries on Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Treatise
on the Middle, Called “Wisdom”
and although the other six commentaries mostly use syllogistic statements, this
master flings many consequences.
Most of the explanations in the commentaries by masters [who wrote texts] other
than the Akutobhayā Commentary and the Clear Words that are mentioned in
Bhāvaviveka’s Lamp for (Nāgārjuna’s) “Wisdom” are seen to be in the class of
syllogisms…The master Buddhapālita refutes each of the four extreme types of
production through consequences and similarly does commentary within using
many consequences. The Buddhapālita Commentary contains many [statements
of consequences] such as, for instance (in commenting on Nāgārjuna’s Treatise
on the Middle, I.1):
About that, respectively, things are not produced from their own enti-
ties because [if they were] their production [again] would be just sense-
less and because production would be endless. It is thus: the production
again of things already existing in their own entities is purposeless.
[Also] if, though existent, they are produced, they would never not be
produced; hence, that also is not asserted. Therefore, respectively,
things are not produced from self.
They also are not produced from other. Why? For it would [ab-
surdly] follow that everything would be produced from everything.
They also are not produced from both self and other because the
fallacies of both [production from self and production from other]
would [absurdly] follow.
They also are not produced causelessly because it would [ab-
surdly] follow that everything always would be produced from every-
thing and because there would be the fallacy that all endeavor would
be just senseless.
སློབ་དཔོན་ཐོགས་མེད་གླིང་འདིར་བྱོན་ནས་སེམས་ཙམ་གྱི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བའི་རྗེས་ཙམ་ལ་

190 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
སློབ་དཔོན་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཀྱིས་དབུ་མ་རྩ་བ་ཤེས་རབ་ལ་འགྲེལ་པ་མཛད་ནས་
ཐལ་འགྱུར་གྱི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བ་ཡིན་ཏེ། སྤྱིར་རྩ་ཤེ་ལ་འགྲེལ་པ་བརྒྱད་ཡོད་ཅིང་། འགྲེལ་པ་
གཞན་དྲུག་གིས་ཕལ་ཆེར་སྦྱོར་ངག་མཛད་ཀྱང་སློབ་དཔོན་འདིས་ཐལ་འགྱུར་མང་པོ་
འཕེན་པར་མཛད་པ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར། འགྲེལ་པ་ག་ལེས་འཇིགས་མེད་དང་། ཚིག་གསལ་
གཉིས་མིན་པའི་སློབ་དཔོན་གཞན་གྱི་འགྲེལ་པ་ཕལ་ཆེར་གྱི་བཤད་པ་ཤེས་རབ་སྒྲོན་
མེར་བཀོད་པ་དག་ཀྱང་སྦྱོར་ངག་གི་ཕྱོགས་སུ་སྣང་ཞིང་། …སློབ་དཔོན་སངས་རྒྱས་
བསྐྱངས་ཀྱིས་མཐའ་བཞིའི་སྐྱེ་བ་རེ་རེ་ནས་ཐལ་བས་བཀག་ཅིང་། དེ་བཞིན་དུ་ཐལ་
འགྱུར་མང་པོ་མཛད་ནས་བཀྲལ་བ་ཡིན་ཏེ། བུདྷ་པཱ་ལི་ཏ་ལས། དེ་ལ་རེ་ཞིག་དངོས་པོ་
བདག་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་དེ། དེ་དག་གི་སྐྱེ་བ་དོན་མེད་པ་ཉིད་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་དང་།
སྐྱེ་བ་ཐུག་པ་མེད་པར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །འདི་ལྟར་དངོས་པོ་བདག་གི་བདག་ཉིད་
དུ་ཡོད་པ་རྣམས་ལ་ཡང་སྐྱེ་བ་ལ་དགོས་པ་མེད་དེ། གལ་ཏེ་ཡོད་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་ན་མི་སྐྱེ་བར་
མི་འགྱུར་བས་དེ་ཡང་མི་འདོད་དེ། དེའི་ཕྱིར་རེ་ཞིག་དངོས་པོ་རྣམས་བདག་ལས་སྐྱེ་བ་
མེད་དོ། །གཞན་ལས་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་དེ། ཅིའི་ཕྱིར་ཞེ་ན། ཐམས་ཅད་ལས་ཐམས་ཅད་སྐྱེ་
བར་ཐལ་བར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །བདག་དང་གཞན་དང་གཉིས་ཀ་ལས་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་བ་
མེད་དེ་གཉིས་ཀའི་སྐྱོན་དུ་ཐལ་བར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །རྒྱུ་མེད་ལས་ཀྱང་སྐྱེ་བ་མེད་
དེ། རྟག་ཏུ་ཐམས་ཅད་ལས་ཐམས་ཅད་སྐྱེ་བར་ཐལ་བར་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། རྩོམ་
པ་ཐམས་ཅད་དོན་མེད་པ་ཉིད་ཀྱི་སྐྱོན་དུ་འགྱུར་བའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །ཞེས་པ་ལྟ་བུ་མང་ངོ་། །
See Hopkins, Maps of the Profound, 473.
As is evident in the next debate, Jam-yang-shay-pa takes the agent of “opens” to be Bud-
dhapālita. It is not entirely unusual in Tibetan for the agent of the past participle and the
agent of the main verb to be different, but here it is especially counterintuitive. Jam-yang-
shay-pa and his followers stand alone among the major Ge-lug-pa scholars in taking the
agents of the verbals in this sentence this way.
Jam-yang-shay-pa in his Great Exposition of Tenets expands on Tsong-kha-pa’s state-
ment:
After Bhāvaviveka opened the way of the Autonomy Middle Way School, the
master Chandrakīrti refuted autonomy in the master Bhāvaviveka’s system. Hav-
ing, moreover, not just refuted it but refuted it well, he established the system of
the Consequence School as not shared with the Autonomy School and below.
For although Buddhapālita opened the mere way of the Consequence School, it
was not clear whether to assert autonomy or not, whereas Chandrakīrti demon-
strated in many ways:
that Buddhapālita did not assert autonomy
proofs that it is not suitable for Proponents of the Middle to use autonomous
[syllogisms]
and, oppositely, damages to autonomous syllogisms and establishment by way

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 191
of the object’s own character
whereupon he established [the Consequence School] as unshared. For instance,
Chandrakīrti’s autocommentary on the Supplement to (Nāgārjuna’s) “Treatise
on the Middle” says, “May scholars ascertain that this system is unshared.”
ལེགས་ལྡན་གྱིས་དབུ་མ་རང་རྒྱུད་པའི་སྲོལ་ཕྱེ་བ་དེའི་རྗེས་སུ་སློབ་དཔོན་ཟླ་བ་གྲགས་
པས་སློབ་དཔོན་ལེགས་ལྡན་ལུགས་ཀྱི་རང་རྒྱུད་བཀག་སྟེ། དེ་ཡང་བཀག་ཙམ་མིན་
པར་ལེགས་པར་བཀག་ནས། ཐལ་འགྱུར་བའི་ལུགས་རང་རྒྱུད་པ་མན་ཆད་དང་ཐུན་
མོང་མ་ཡིན་པར་སྒྲུབ་པ་ཡིན་ཏེ། སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་ཀྱིས་ཐལ་འགྱུར་བའི་སྲོལ་ཙམ་
ཕྱེ་ཡང་རང་རྒྱུད་བཞེད་མི་བཞེད་མི་གསལ་བ་ལས། ཟླ་བས་སངས་རྒྱས་བསྐྱངས་རང་
རྒྱུད་མི་བཞེད་པ་དང་དབུ་མ་བས་རང་རྒྱུད་བྱ་མི་རིགས་པའི་སྒྲུབ་བྱེད་དང་། བཟློག་
ཕྱོགས་རང་རྒྱུད་ཀྱི་སྦྱོར་བ་དང་། རང་མཚན་ལ་གནོད་བྱེད་མང་དུ་བསྟན་ནས་ཐུན་
མོང་མ་ཡིན་པར་སྒྲུབ་པའི་ཕྱིར་ཏེ། འཇུག་འགྲེལ་ལས་ལུགས་འདི་ནི་ཐུན་མོང་མ་ཡིན་
པའོ་ཞེས་མཁས་པ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་ངེས་པར་མཛད་དུ་གསོལ། ཞེས་པ་ལྟ་བུའོ། །
Jam-yang-shay-pa then proceeds to lay out Chandrakīrti’s presentation in considerable de-
tail; see Hopkins, Maps of the Profound, 481-500.
The reference of no entailment is to the beginning of debate 10 where Jam-yang-shay-pa
responded: [That Buddhapālita is the opener of the chariot-way where (Tsong-kha-pa)
says, “opens the chariot-way,”] does not entail [that in this (passage) the demonstrator (1)
of many proofs that it is unsuitable for a Proponent of the Middle Way to use autonomy
(syllogisms) and (2) of much damage to the opposite position, autonomy, is Buddhapālita].
Jam-yang-shay-pa’s point is that Buddhapālita opened the chariot-way of the Middle
Way Consequence School by using many consequences, and Chandrakīrti in addition clar-
ified the unsuitability of autonomous syllogisms and suitability of consequences. For dis-
cussion of this issue, see Gung-thang Lo-drö-gya-tsho’s Clarification of Jam-yang-shay-
pa’s “Decisive Analysis” and Gung-thang Kön-chog-tan-pay-drön-me’s “Annotations”
(TBRC W1KG21227, 20a.1).
rang rgyud mi gsal bas. In other words, Bhāvaviveka thought that although Buddhapālita
did not manifestly state autonomous syllogisms, Buddhapālita intended their inclusion
since Buddhapālita would have agreed with Bhāvaviveka that consequences alone cannot
generate inference of the meaning intended to be communicated. Therefore, Bhāvaviveka
considered that even Buddhapālita would eventually state the intended communication in
the form of an autonomous syllogism.
Commentary on (Maitreya’s) “Ornament for the Clear Realizations,” vol. 1, 8.17-8.28,
Included among Superiors (ārya) due to having generated supramundane
pristine wisdom,
The one called Vimuktisena (rnam par grol ba’i sde) because of being re-
leased (grol bas) from the objects to be abandoned by the path of seeing
also,
Having seen that the commentaries done by the earlier two masters were not

192 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
done exactly in accordance with the meaning of the Mother [Sūtras] since
they were done in accordance with the texts of Cognition-Only or since
Vasubandhu had not given up adherence to Cognition and Asaṅga made his
[commentary in terms of mind-only] for the sake of taming Vasubandhu,
With intelligence dwelling in the middle—the meaning of the Mother and of
[Maitreya’s] treatise free from the extremes of permanence and annihilation
and realizing such or with unbiased intelligence—properly differentiated
the topics in commentary connecting the Ornament with the Twenty-five
Thousand. Gyal-tshab’s Explanation says that thereby it is not redundant,
and also the general stages of the vast paths also are concordant between this
and the two earlier masters.
Jam-yang-shay-pa makes a similar statement in his Great Exposition of Tenets:
Hence, although prior to that time there were indeed mere Proponents of the
Middle who accorded with the Yogic Practitioners, only the master Shānta-
rakṣhita is the opener of the chariot-way of the Yogic-Autonomy Middle Way
School because this master, just after even Chandrakīrti, set up a great way upon
extensively composing texts such as the Ornament for the Middle—root text and
commentary—which present such a system. Although even prior to this there
existed the mere way, this does no damage [to Shāntarakṣhita being the opener
of the chariot-way] because it is like the fact that in the world for a road on which
great chariots can travel the mere existence of a road is not sufficient, a broad
and great highway is needed. The master Ye-shay-day says:
Then, the master Shāntarakṣhita made a different Middle Way system,
teaching—based on Yogic Practice [that is, Mind-Only] treatises—that
external objects conventionally do not exist and that the mind ulti-
mately is without inherent existence. Thereby, the Middle Way School
arose in two forms.
Translation from Hopkins, Maps of the Profound, 503-504.
Tenzin Gyatso, the Fourteenth Dalai Lama, commenting on stanza 1bcd, says in Kind-
ness, Clarity, and Insight, trans. and ed. by Jeffrey Hopkins (Ithaca, N.Y.: Snow Lion,
1984), 201/228:
With respect to philosophical view, the Translator Marpa explored the view of
emptiness under the direction of Maitrīpāda, who in his Ten Stanzas on Suchness
(tattvadaśaka, de kho na nyid bcu pa) says:
Not Aspectarians, not Non-Aspectarians,
Even Proponents of the Middle who are not adorned
With the guru’s speech are only mediocre.
He says that both True and False Aspectarian Proponents of Mind-Only do not
have the final view and that even within the Middle Way School, those who are
not adorned with the quintessential instructions of the guru are mediocre. In com-
mentary on this, Maitrīpāda’s student, Sahajavajra, identifies the “guru” as the
glorious Chandrakīrti, making it clear that Maitrīpāda considers Chandrakīrti’s
quintessential instructions to be essential if the view is to be supreme. Thus,
Maitrīpāda’s view, and hence Marpa’s, is that of Chandrakīrti’s Middle Way
Consequence School.
The entailment here is difficult to track down; it may be located in the citation from

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 193
Tsong-kha-pa’s The Essence of Eloquence, namely: that this system’s assertion that the
aspects of blue, yellow, and so on are effective things entails that it is a Middle Way School
that in conventional terms makes assertions in accordance with True Aspectarians.
In his Great Exposition of Tenets (Hopkins, Maps of the Profound, 768) Jam-yang-shay-
pa makes a similar statement immediately after citing the same quote from Tsong-kha-pa’s
The Essence of Eloquence:
For they conventionally assert that since the aspects of appearances as blue and
yellow are objects of experience of direct valid cognitions, real conventionali-
ties—established the way they appear—are established merely in a relaxed and
comfortable way (nyams dga’ dga’ ltar) in the perspective of non-analytical and
non-investigatory awarenesses.
In his Annotations to Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Great Exposition of Tenets Ngag-wang-pal-dan
challenges the relevance of Jam-yang-shay-pa’s bringing up here Shāntarakṣhita’s asser-
tion of real conventionalities when he says:
Tsong-kha-pa is explaining that by reason of [Shāntarakṣhita’s] asserting that the
aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth are effective things, he accords with True
Aspectarians; Tsong-kha-pa is not explaining that due to [Shāntarakṣhita’s] way
of asserting real conventionalities he is established as in accordance with True
Aspectarians.
In his Annotations to Jam-yang-shay-pa’s Great Exposition of Tenets (Hopkins, Maps of
the Profound, 766-768) Ngag-wang-pal-dan says:
It can most clearly be proven that the master Shāntarakṣhita accords with True
Aspectarians through eight stanzas [in his Ornament for the Middle, stanzas 52-
60 with an initial stanza for the False Aspectarian’s position,] refuting that as-
pects of blue, yellow, and so forth are non-effective imputations (dngos por med
pa’i kun brtags). It is as follows:
False Aspectarian: Sense consciousnesses are not generated in the aspects of
blue, yellow, and so forth. For example, due to colors being placed near it, though
an unaltered crystal remains pure, aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth clearly
appear [in it] through the force of the ripening of predispositions for error depos-
ited beginninglessly [in the mind], as is the case, for example, with a lump of
clay appearing as horses, elephants, and so forth through the force of mantra and
substances. Therefore, the aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth are non-effective
imputations like the falling hairs that appear to someone with an eye disease.
Refutation: There are eight refutations.
1. The consequence that experience of aspects would not be feasible: It [absurdly]
follows that the subject, aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth, are not feasibly
clearly felt and experienced because of not being effective things. [Not being
effective things] entails [not feasibly being clearly felt and experienced] because
a consciousness separate from an effective thing that is an aspect—that is, devoid
of an aspect—is not observed [that is, does not exist].
2. The consequence that consciousness would not be feasible: It [absurdly] follows
that the subject, consciousness, is not feasibly consciousness of an aspect because
it does not have an aspect, as is the case, for example, with pain not having pleas-
ure and white not having blue.

194 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
3. Explicit experience (dngos su myong ba) would not be feasible: It [absurdly]
follows that the subject, an aspect, is not feasibly explicitly experienced because
of not being the substantial entity of consciousness, as is the case, for example,
with a sky-flower.
4. Experience of the imputational (brtags myong) is not feasible: It follows that the
subject, consciousness, does not experience an aspect upon imputation because
an aspect would not have the capacity of generating a consciousness into having
[its] aspect, as is the case, for example, with a horse’s horn.
5. The consequence of non-relation with consciousness: It [absurdly] follows that
it is not feasible that when consciousness experiences, it experiences various as-
pects because aspects and consciousness are unrelated, since they are not related
as one entity (bdag gcig ’brel) and are not in a relation of derivation (de byung
’brel; provenance).
6. Occasional arising would not be feasible: It [absurdly] follows with respect to
the subject, an aspect, that if it does not have causes, [its] occasionally arising
[sometimes being produced and sometimes not being produced] is not feasible
because of not relying [on causes], and it follows with respect to the subject, an
aspect, that if it has causes, it is an other-powered nature because of being pro-
duced from causes.
7. The consequence of there only being [consciousnesses having] the aspect of the
apprehender [that is, only self-cognizing consciousnesses]: If [consciousnesses
having] the aspect of the apprehended [that is, consciousnesses knowing another
object] do not exist, then it [absurdly] follows that the subject, consciousnesses,
are only [consciousnesses having] the aspect of the apprehender [that is, only
self-cognizing consciousnesses] because of being consciousnesses that do not
have the aspect of the apprehended. If it is accepted [that consciousnesses are
only consciousnesses having the aspect of the apprehender, that is, only self-
cognizing consciousnesses], then it [absurdly] follows that [a consciousness hav-
ing] the aspect of the apprehender [that is, a self-cognizing consciousness], like
a pure crystal sphere, devoid of the aspect of the apprehended does not exist
because whereas it would be suitable to observe such, it is not observed.
8. The consequence that [an aspect] is an other-powered nature: If you are saying
that although an aspect does not exist in fact, it appears through the force of
mistake, then it follows that the subject, an aspect, is an other-powered nature
because of relying upon mistake or arising from the force of mistake.
This is in commentary on V.20; Maitreya’s Ornament for the Clear Realizations (V.19-
20) says:
In a nature without cessation
What type of conceptualization
Is extinguished by the path called “seeing”?!
What aspect of nonproduction is attained?!
Whereas the others on the one hand [assert] phenomena as existent,
I reckon the statement by the Teacher on the other hand
That the obstructions to objects of knowledge
Are extinguished to be amazing.
Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s Meaning of the Words comments:

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 195
In that truly established defilements have a nature without cessation—that is,
new cessation of the previously existent—what truly established, previously ex-
istent type of conceptualization that is to be abandoned by the path of seeing
is extinguished?! And what aspect of nonproduction—that is, previously non-
existent annihilation of the about-to-be-produced—is attained?! That is to say,
an extinction is not suitable to be attained.
Whereas the others, Proponents of [Truly Established] Things, assert on
the one hand that external and internal phenomena ultimately exist, I, Mait-
reyanātha, reckon the statement by the Teacher Buddha on the other hand
that the obstructions obscuring objects of knowledge are extinguished to be
amazing because if things are truly established, obstructions are not fit to be
abandoned.
Hopkins and Yi, Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s Explanation of (Maitreya’s) Treatise “Ornament
for the Clear Realizations” from the Approach of the Meaning of the Words: Sacred Word
of Maitreyanātha.
Jam-yang-shay-pa makes a longer citation of this in his Great Exposition of Tenets (Hop-
kins, draft translation, not included in his Maps of the Profound, 769):
Due to thinking, “If there is no apprehended, there is no apprehender,” a mere
cognition that has the character of the aspect of the apprehender is also elimi-
nated, whereupon it is determined that “This sole nondual pristine wisdom really
exists.”
Ngag-wang-pal-dan (TBRC W5926-3831, Annotations, za, 63a.5) challenges the relevance
of this passage to Jam-yang-shay-pa’s point that Haribhadra accords with False Aspectar-
ians based on Gyal-tshab’s exposition of it and Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s opinion that both
True Aspectarians and False Aspectarians would agree on the point:
That this passage [in Haribhadra’s commentary on the fifth chapter of Maitreya’s
Ornament for the Clear Realizations] establishes Haribhadra as concordant with
False Aspectarians is a very great basis for analysis because the meaning of this
passage is as Gyal-tshab’s Ornament for the Essence says:
Due to thinking in the subsequent period, “If an apprehended-object
does not exist as another substantial entity, a nonmistaken apprehender
to which apprehended-object and apprehending-subject appear as dif-
ferent substantial entities does not exist,” a mere cognition—appre-
hending unmistakenly—that has the character of the aspect of the ap-
prehender is also eliminated, whereupon it is determined and taken to
mind that “This sole pristine wisdom without the duality of appre-
hended-object and apprehending-subject is a really existent entity.”
This means that as an imprint of that realization the nondual conscious-
ness has not abandoned the apprehension of true existence, but it is not
suitable to mean that by its own power it induces the conception of true
existence and sets up the tenet of true establishment. As explained ear-
lier, it teaches that in the subsequent period an apprehender to which
apprehended-object and apprehending-subject appear as different sub-
stantial entities is understood as mistaken and that an apprehension [of
such] as nonmistaken is overcome.

196 Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins
and because both True Aspectarians and False Aspectarians do not assert that an
apprehender to which apprehended-object and apprehending-subject appear as
different substantial entities is nonmistaken.
ལུང་འདིས་སེང་བཟང་རྣམ་རྫུན་པ་དང་མཐུན་པར་གྲུབ་པ་ཡང་དཔྱད་གཞི་ཤིན་ཏུ་
ཆེ་བ་ཡིན་ཏེ། ལུང་འདིའི་དོན་ནི་རྣམ་བཤད་སྙིང་པོ་རྒྱན་ལས། གཟུང་བ་རྫས་གཞན་
མེད་ན་གཟུང་འཛིན་རྫས་ཐ་དད་དུ་སྣང་བའི་འཛིན་པ་མ་འཁྲུལ་བ་མེད་དོ་སྙམ་དུ་
རྗེས་ཀྱི་གནས་སྐབས་སུ་ངེས་པར་སེམས་པས་འཛིན་པའི་རྣམ་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད་རྣམ་
པར་རིག་པ་མ་འཁྲུལ་བར་འཛིན་པ་ཙམ་དེ་ཡང་བསལ་ཏེ་གཟུང་འཛིན་གཉིས་སུ་
མེད་པའི་ཡེ་ཤེས་འབའ་ཞིག་འདི་ཡང་དག་པར་ཡོད་པའི་ངོ་བོ་ཡིན་ནོ་སྙམ་དུ་ངེས་
པར་བྱས་ནས་ཡིད་ལ་བྱེད་པའོ། །འདི་ནི་རྟོགས་པ་དེའི་ལག་རྗེས་ལ་གཉིས་མེད་ཀྱི་
ཤེས་པ་བདེན་འཛིན་མ་སྤངས་པའི་དོན་ཡིན་གྱི། བདེན་ཞེན་རང་སྟོབས་ཀྱིས་འདྲེན་
པ་དང་། བདེན་པར་གྲུབ་པ་ལ་གྲུབ་མཐའ་འཆའ་བའི་དོན་དུ་མི་རུང་ངོ་། །སྔར་བཤད་
པ་ལྟར་གཟུང་འཛིན་རྫས་ཐ་དད་དུ་སྣང་བའི་འཛིན་པ་འཁྲུལ་བར་ཁོང་དུ་ཆུད་ཅིང་།
མ་འཁྲུལ་བར་འཛིན་པ་ལྡོག་པ་རྗེས་ཀྱི་གནས་སྐབས་སྟོན་པ་ཡིན་ནོ། །ཞེས་གསུངས་པ་
ལྟར་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་དང་། དེ་ཙམ་ལ་རྣམ་བདེན་རྫུན་གཉིས་ཀ་འདོད་པ་མཐུན་པའི་
ཕྱིར་དང་། གཟུང་འཛིན་རྫས་ཐ་དད་དུ་སྣང་བའི་འཛིན་པ་མ་འཁྲུལ་བ་ཡིན་པར་རྣམ་
བདེན་རྫུན་གཉིས་ཀས་མི་འདོད་པའི་ཕྱིར་རོ། །
The entailment is likely that Jetāri’s explanation entails that he is a Proponent of the
Middle Way Autonomy School resembling Mind-Only Tainted False Aspectarians.
Correcting rnam rdzun pas in 2011 TBRC bla brang (16a.3) and 2015 Go-mang Lhasa
(12a.5) to rnam rdzun pa’i in accordance with the citation of the same passage in Jam-
yang-shay-pa’s Great Exposition of Tenets 2011 TBRC bla brang (pha, 132b.1) followed,
admittedly, by a strange perpendicular stroke (shad).
Jam-yang-shay-pa cites only the first two lines; he makes a longer citation of this passage
in his Great Exposition of Tenets which has been added here to fill out the ellipsis in this
citation to make it more meaningful even though it itself contains an ellipsis before the last
three lines. Ngag-wang-pal-dan (Annotations, dbu ma pa, ra, 64a.4) reports that he did not
find this passage in either of two dissimilar Tibetan translations of the Nine Modes of the
Perfection of Wisdom or its commentaries; his own commentary in that note, nevertheless,
illuminates the passage:
In its measure of abiding, an awareness—that is, a sense consciousness—not
transformed by aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth, indeed remains like a lump
of pure crystal not transformed by colors. However, ordinary common beings
through the force of defilements produced from the substantial cause—
which is the ignorance arisen from the thorough maturation of beginninglessly
deposited mistaken predispositions that obscures the nondual and indivisible
entity of (1) the aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth and (2) consciousness—
perceive in another format, that is to say, perceive consciousness transformed
by aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth. When the wise analyze this, the mode

Endnotes by Jeffrey Hopkins 197
of subsistence of consciousness just as it is, the entity of the aspects of blue,
yellow, and so forth and consciousness, appears dualistically, unmixed individ-
ually. Because through the force of the mind’s mistake the aspects of blue, yel-
low, and so forth while not existing as effective things appear so, apprehended-
object and apprehending-subject also appear as different substantial entities,
like, for example, through the force of being affected by a substance* and mantra
not only does a horse of a magical illusion appear but its being a horse also
appears. In that way, for the wise—who realize the measure of abiding—those
aspects of blue, yellow, and so forth are imputationals that do not exist as effec-
tive things.
Since not even a bit of this passage appears in the two dissimilar Tibetan
translations of the Nine Modes of the Perfection of Wisdom or its commentaries,
I wonder whether this is not the text Nine Modes of the Perfection of Wisdom.
གནས་ཚོད་ལ་བློ་སྟེ་དབང་ཤེས་ནི་སྔོ་སེར་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྣམ་པས་ཁ་མ་བསྒྱུར་བར་
ཤེལ་སྒོང་དག་པ་ཚོན་གྱིས་ཁ་མ་བསྒྱུར་བ་ལྟར་གནས་མོད་ཀྱང་། ཉེར་ལེན་ལས་སྐྱེས་
པའི་དྲི་མ་སྟེ་ཐོག་མ་མེད་པ་ནས་བཞག་པའི་འཁྲུལ་བའི་བག་ཆགས་ཡོངས་སུ་སྨིན་པ་
ལས་བྱུང་བའི་མ་རིག་པས་སྔོ་སེར་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྣམ་པ་དང་ཤེས་པའི་བདག་ཉིད་
གཉིས་སུ་མེད་ཅིང་དབྱེར་མེད་པར་བསྒྲིབ་པའི་དབང་གིས་སོ་སྐྱེ་ཐ་མལ་བ་རྣམས་ཀྱིས་
གཞན་གྱི་གཟུགས་ཏེ་ཤེས་པ་སྔོ་སེར་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྣམ་པས་ཁ་བསྒྱུར་བར་སྣང་ལ། དེ་
ལ་མཁས་པས་རྣམ་པར་དཔྱད་པ་ན་ཤེས་པའི་གནས་ཚུལ་ཇི་ལྟར་ཡིན་པ་དེ་ལྟར་སྔོ་
སེར་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྣམ་པ་དང་ཤེས་པའི་བདག་ཉིད་ནི་གཉིས་སུ་སྟེ་སོ་སོར་མ་འདྲེས་
པར་སྣང་ངོ་། །སེམས་འཁྲུལ་བའི་དབང་གིས་སྔོ་སེར་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྣམ་པ་དངོས་པོར་
མེད་བཞིན་དུ་སྣང་བ་ཡིན་པའི་ཕྱིར་གཟུང་འཛིན་རྫས་ཐ་དད་དུ་ཡང་སྣང་སྟེ། དཔེར་
ན་རྫས་སྔགས་ཀྱིས་བསླད་པའི་དབང་གིས་སྒྱུ་མའི་རྟ་སྣང་བར་མ་ཟད་དེ་ཉིད་རྟ་ཡིན་
པར་ཡང་སྣང་བ་བཞིན་ནོ། །དེ་ལྟར་ཤེས་པའི་གནས་ཚོད་རྟོགས་པའི་མཁས་པ་ལ་ནི་སྔོ་
སེར་ལ་སོགས་པའི་རྣམ་པ་དེ་དངོས་པོར་མེད་པའི་ཀུན་བརྟགས་ཡིན་ཞེས་པའོ། །ཤེར་
ཕྱིན་ཚིགས་བཅད་དགུ་པ་འགྱུར་མི་འདྲ་བ་གཉིས་དང་དེའི་འགྲེལ་པ་རྣམས་སུ་ལུང་
འདིའི་ཚིག་ཟུར་ཙམ་ཡང་མི་སྣང་བས་ན་འདི་ནི་ཚིགས་བཅད་དགུ་པའི་གཞུང་མིིན་
ནམ་སྙམ་མོ། །
* According to the late Ngag-wang-leg-dan (ngag dbang legs ldan, 1900-1971), Ge-she of
the Go-mang College of Dre-pung Monastic University and Abbot Emeritus of Gyu-may
Tantric College in Lhasa, Tibet, this is a salve rubbed on pebble or stick, for instance, that
is the basis of conjuring which—through the power of mantra recited by the magician,
which affects the eye consciousnesses of both the audience and the magician—causes it to
appear as a horse in Ngag-wang-pal-dan’s rendition.
